---
id: 531c3ca7-7539-5645-899c-dc72533bd942
title: "EV progress report: Which EU carmakers are on track for 2025-27 targets?"
date: 2025-09-08T00:01:00
office: Brussels
publication_type: Report
article_url: https://www.transportenvironment.org/articles/ev-progress-report-2025
pdf_url: https://www.transportenvironment.org/uploads/files/2025_09_EV_Progress_Report.pdf
doc_ids: [531c3ca7-7539-5645-899c-dc72533bd942]
---

# EV progress report: Which EU carmakers are on track for 2025-27 targets?

> The EU's CO₂ regulation for cars and vans is the backbone of Europe's automotive climate and industrial policy. Data from the first half of 2025 show that the EV transition is on track.

T&E EV progress report – 202508/09/2025SummaryThe EU's CO₂ regulation for cars and vans is the backbone of Europe's automotive climate and industrial policy. Data from the first half of 2025 show that the EV transition is on track. Key findings: ●●●●All European carmakers are on track to comply over thanks to a surge in their BEV sales - reaching 25% share over the 3-year period (18% in 2025);However, with the EU's delay of the 2025 target, carmakers took their foot off the gas, leading to a shortfall of 2 million BEVs (over ). Evidence shows that carmakers inflated BEV price premiums as CO2 targets got relaxed;Despite carmakers' attempt to slow down the EV market, structural battery price decreases will continue to power the EV transition. By 2027, EV battery prices are expected to drop more than over the past three years;Charging coverage is surging in line with BEV penetration: All EU countries have already exceeded their 2025 target for the total number of charging points and almost 80% of the core EU highway network is covered;● While the EU is discussing the 2035 target, global markets are going electric fast: Mexico (5% BEV share in H1 2025), Indonesia (13%), Thailand (24%), China (30%), Vietnam (42%). Europe is losing ground in the global EV race. Europe now faces a decisive choice: to either lead the global BEV race and confidently enter the electric age or risk falling behind in the fossil fuel era. Weakening the 2030-35 CO2 targets would dismantle all investments and efforts on EVs while China would extend its lead on EVs.2European carmakers' EV sales are growingOverall BEV sales of European carmakers are up 38% in the first seven months of 2025.From January to July 2025, Volkswagen Group BEV sales volumes have increased by 90%. Mercedes-Benz is lagging with a 2% drop following its strategy change to focus on ICEs. In the first seven months of 2025, BEVs accounted for 16.6% of sales, up from 13.2% a year earlier. ●●3European carmakers' EV sales are growingThe EU is in the midst of an electric car boom. The market should reach 18% in 2025, then 25% over and exceed 55% by 2030.Mercedes-Benz is expected to have the slowest growth in its BEV sales.4But carmakers took their foot off the gasCarmakers have slowed down the BEV uptake as the EU delayed the 2025 target, leading to a shortfall of 2 million BEVsThe weakening of the regulation led to a cut in the sales forecast from GlobalData, with the number of BEVs forecasted over being reduced by 2 million.5Carmakers inflated BEV-ICE price premiums as CO2 targets got relaxedCarmakers reversed their lower BEV price strategies as soon as EU delayed the 2025 CO2 target. According to Bloomberg, the BEV-ICE price premium fell to 30% in early 2025, down from 40% in 2024, thanks to higher BEV discounts and a wider range of affordable BEVs.In June, the price premium rebounded to 40%, as the EU's three-year phasing-in period for the CO2 target came into effect. This results in a BEV market slowdown (previous slide)●●6All carmaker pools are still on track to complyDespite a large H1 2025 compliance gap, all carmaker pools are expected to be compliant with their CO2 targets over three years.Volkswagen can comply with a 22% BEV share over 2025-27 and a focus on ICE improvements. The launch of new affordable BEV models such as the ID.2 should secure compliance.7Mercedes-Benz is the only EU carmaker that needs to rely on poolingMercedes-Benz is the only European carmaker group lagging behind the EU targets, and would need to pool.● Mercedes-Benz is expected to keep pooling with Volvo Cars and Polestar over.Geely's chairman owns 10% of the Mercedes Group while the Geely Group owns Volvo Cars and Polestar.The pooling allows Mercedes-Benz to focus on profitable and polluting ICEs.●●8Mercedes-Benz becomes Europe's laggardMercedes-Benz is falling behind its competitors and trying to deflect the blame onto the EU. However, BMW's success demonstrates that the problem lies with Mercedes' strategy, not the EU.9Sales of affordable BEVs are set to double in 2025Thanks to lower battery prices, carmakers are launching new affordable models with a starting price below €25,000.Sales volumes of affordable models should double in 2025 compared to 2024.For the first time since the period, the share of affordable and mass-market models should account for almost half of BEV sales.●●10At least 19 new affordable BEV models are expected to be available in 2027We expect nine affordable models to be available by the end of 2025. At least 19 affordable models are expected to be available by the end of 2027.More than two-thirds of affordable models are expected to be made in Europe.11European battery prices are set to continue falling rapidly The decrease in European battery prices (-28% by 2027 vs. 2025) could exceed the decrease over the past three years, unlocking further BEV price reductions.The increasing share of LFP batteries in Europe (50% by 2030) supports the drop of battery prices in Europe. China has already reached a 67% LFP share in 2025. This trend has yet to translate into lower prices for Europeans.Prices are expected to drop by 46% between 2025 and 2030.●●12BEV growth is supported by a growing charging networkThe EU charging network is growing in line with the BEV fleet penetration. The number of public chargers is expected to reach 1.1 million in 2025, five times more than in 2020. The charging network is set to grow by 90% by million chargers), compared to 2025, based on ChargeUp Europe forecasts.13100% of EU countries meet their AFIR target in 2025The AFIR fleet-based target ensures EU countries have enough chargers for their BEV fleet.All EU countries already meet their 2025 AFIR fleet-based target based on the amount of charging points deployed in H1 2025.For the EU as a whole, the AFIR target is exceeded by 174%.22 of the 27 EU countries have at least twice as much charging power as required by law.●●●14The TEN-T network coverage is on track in most markets77% of the core highway network is already covered with ultra-fast charging and meets the 2025 network coverage AFIR target.● Most of the Western and Northern EU TEN-T core network is compliant with the 2025 target enabling seamless cross continental travel. ●Eastern countries still have some gaps but have the fastest growing networks (+10%p coverage so far in 'Emerging' markets are going electric fast and catching up with the EU (1/2)European is losing ground in the global EV race. Leadership in BEV technology is essential to the European industry's competitiveness globally.● While the EU is discussing the 2035 target, global markets are going electric: India (5%), Mexico (5%), Indonesia (13%), Thailand (24%), Vietnam (42%). ●In the world's biggest market, China, BEV sales reached 30%.16'Emerging' markets are going electric fast (2/2)Global prospects for European carmakers lie in the fast-growing EV market. With the US market closing to EU imports due to new 15% tariffs (up from 2.5%), the most accessible opportunities are now in Asia, South America, and Africa - regions that also host the fastest-growing BEV markets.For example: Thailand (+25% growth in volumes between H1 2025 and H1 2024), China (+44%), Mexico (+96%) and Indonesia (+158%). In comparison, the EU27 had a 22% growth in volumes and BEV reached a 16% sales share.17What to do in the car CO2 review?1. Maintain 2030–2035 CO2 targetsTargets are working while delays leads to lost investor confidence, jobs and momentum. 2. Keep biofuels outBiofuels have no scalable, sustainable role in road transport and pose high fraud import risks (esp. from China).3. Reject lifecycle analysis (LCA) approach Too complex and burdensome for vehicle regulation. LCA is the back door for fuels and would destroy the market signal for BEVs. 4. No PHEVs post-2035PHEVs have been used as SUV-sized defeat-devices for compliance. At best they are a costly distraction from BEVs. 5. Banking & borrowingReplace five-year target steps with a banking borrowing system with annual linear targets in order to prevent stop-and-go EV sales and compliance games. 18Conclusion - A pivotal moment for EuropeThe EU's car and van CO2 regulation is Europe's cornerstone climate and industrial policy for the automotive sector. It has set a clear and credible trajectory for the automotive industry and the emobility value chain to make the necessary investments and plan the transition. While taking stock of progress is important, changing targets 10 years ahead of time on the premise that they are not feasible is simply defeatist and short-sighted.The Commission should keep the regulation as agreed in 2023 and focus on the building blocks needed to deliver it: a strong industrial strategy that scales battery production, secures raw materials, provides smart incentives across Member States, and accelerates investment in grids and permitting. This is a pivotal moment for Europe. The way we act now will determine if Europe secures industrial leadership in the global EV race and enters the electric age, or falls behind in the fossil age. 19Annexes20European carmakers' EV sales are growingEuropean carmakers BEV share grew from 12% in the first half of 2024 to 16% in the first half of 2025.Volkswagen has the largest BEV share growth with 18% in H1 2025 compared to 10% in HData sources used for the compliance analysisT&E has acquired global vehicle sales forecast supplied by GlobalData; Copyright. All rights reserved; GlobalData is an independent provider of industry information. The sales forecast is based on GlobalData's model of the macro-environment, including economic and competitive developments. GlobalData uses industry contacts, press and media coverage, direct automotive manufacturer and supplier contacts, investment analysts, and other Globaldata assets. Permission to use GlobalData copyrighted reports, data and information does not imply endorsement by GlobalData of the manner, format, context, content, conclusion, opinion or viewpoint in which GlobalData reports, data and information or their derivatives are used or referenced herein.GlobalData's dataset has been used to inform T&E modelling of carmaker compliance over, for the infographic on the growing BEV share, and for infographics about BEV sales growth in the global market. Adjustments to the GlobalData forecast for 2025–2027 have been made in order to reconcile the differences observed in the H1 2025 powertrain mix with the historical data acquired from Dataforce.Historical sales and emissions data (2024, H1 2025) are supplied by Dataforce. The data coverage for this briefing includes 23 European countries (Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden) and Norway. These 24 countries accounted for 98.3% of the car market in 2023 based on ACEA data. Vehicles identified by T&E as "special purpose vehicles" (e.g. motorhomes, camper vans, ambulances, …) were excluded from the dataset.●●22Data sources used for other infographics ●●●●●●●23BEV and ICE average net selling (ASP) prices are from Bloomberg Intelligence and cover France, Germany and the UK.The breakdown of affordable, mass-market and premium vehicle sales share is based on T&E analysis of GlobalData. Affordable models have been identified by T&E as models with a starting price below €25,000 (announced price by carmakers for the entry-level variant). Mass-market models are from non-premium brands in segments A, B and C. The total annual BEV share is based on ACEA data.Number of affordable models are from T&E tracking of affordable model launches.Pack prices for batteries delivered in Europe are modelled based on BloombergNEF global price forecast and T&E forecast of battery chemistry. BloombergNEF data includes historical data for global and prices of battery pack delivered in Europe up to 2024, with a short-term forecast for 2025 and a long-term forecast of global pack prices based on a 18% learning rate. LFP share of BEV produced in Europe are from EV-Volumes up to H1 2025. T&E forecasts an increase in LFP share of BEV production in Europe. We assume that the battery chemistry mix used in European car production would converge toward Bloomberg's chemistry mix forecast for passenger cars sold in Europe by 2035.Number of chargers are from EAFO while the forecast between 2025 and 2030 is from ChargeUp Europe.2025 AFIR targets per country are estimated by T&E based on our projections of BEV and PHEV sales for cars and vans.TEN-T charging coverage is based on T&E analysis of Eco-Movement data. CO2 compliance: methodology ●The T&E Central Compliance Scenario for 2025–2027 is based on the following methodology:○○○Carmaker (OEM) powertrain sales shares between 2025 and 2030 are derived from GlobalData forecasts. OEMs' emissions are calculated based on each powertrain share and the average emissions of vehicles within each powertrain group.Emissions for each OEM's powertrain group (PHEVs, FHEVs, MHEVs, conventional ICEs) are forecasted based on the change in sales segments (A, B, C, D, ≥E, Others), where each segment share is from GlobalData forecast, and expected improvements in engine efficiency. Historical values (2024 and H1 2024) of each OEM–powertrain–segment combination are based on Dataforce data.Regulatory flexibilities are modelled. The mass adjustment is based on T&E forecast of the mass of each OEM's powertrain group (the change in mass depends on change in sales segments compared to H1 2025). The ZLEV bonus applied on the carmaker target depends on the BEV and PHEV share. Eco-innovation credits are similar to 2023 for each OEM/pool.Given the wide range of possible strategies for each OEM/pool, any forecast is subject to significant uncertainties. The T&E central scenario is based on plausible trends, informed by our assessment of past trends and GlobalData's forecasts. The next page displays possible variations in compliance gaps if ICEs improvements modelled are not achieved, and if the BEV share increases beyond the GlobalData forecast.The following pages contain further details and explanations on T&E assumptions.● CO2 compliance: sensitivity analysisThe sensitivity analysis displays results for each OEM/pool:● Without any change in ICE powertrain efficiency compared to H1 2025. The only change compared to H1 2025 is the powertrain share derived from GlobalData forecast.● With higher BEV sales share: a +2.5 percentage point increase in BEV share is applied to all OEMs. In that scenario, we keep T&E modelling of ICE efficiency improvements.T&E expects that all OEMs/pools will make the necessary changes to minimise fines over. Any decrease in ICE improvements could be compensated by larger BEV sales and the other way around. CO2 compliance: powertrain mix and emissions CO2 compliance: emissions forecastEmissions forecast: For each OEM, emissions are forecast based on changes in powertrain share. Within each powertrain group, emissions are calculated according to changes in segment share. An annual efficiency improvement of 1.5% is also applied for each combination of OEM-powertrain-segment up to 2027. For reference, an average annual efficiency improvement of 3% was observed over for vehicles of same size, when OEMs needed to comply with their previous CO₂ target. Due to the greater reliance on BEV sales, we conservatively apply a lower annual efficiency improvement up to 2027. European OEMs have expertise in combustion engine optimisation, so a 1.5% efficiency improvement can achievable through engine innovation. OEMs could also adopt a commercial strategy of providing discounts on vehicle variants with lower engine power in order to reduce sales of more polluting variants.PHEV emissions forecast: In addition to the above segment change, the change in the utility factor (UF) curve planned as part of the Euro 6e-Bis and Euro 6e-Bis-FCM regulations is expected to impact PHEV emissions (see Table A8.App5/1). We expect OEMs to minimise the launch of newly type-approved models and facelifts in both 2025 and 2027, in order to minimise the increase in WLTP emissions during the transition period. This is supported by H1 2025 data where the PHEV average emissions is 24 gCO2/km compared to 28 gCO2/km in 2024 while newly type approved would emit more than two times more due to the change in UF in 2025. At the same time, we expect OEMs to increase the electric range of their sales mix. Overall, the combination of longer ranges and launch timing management is expected to limit the increase in WLTP emissions due to UF changes. Nonetheless, we anticipate that the regulatory change would result in a 61% increase in average PHEV WLTP emissions between 2025 and 2027.●● CO2 compliance: regulatory flexibilitiesThe mass parameter is used to calculate OEM-specific targets. We forecast the average mass for each OEM based on changes in powertrain share. Within each powertrain group, masses are calculated according to changes in segment share. We expect OEMs to increase the average range of PHEVs without impacting their mass average. This can be achieved through the use of more energy-dense batteries and lightweight materials in other parts of the vehicle. However, if OEMs fail to limit mass increases, the real-world fuel consumption of PHEVs risks to skyrocket, which would go against the demands of both drivers and regulators. T&E has found that the PHEV real-world fuel consumption is more strongly correlated with mass than with the electric range.The zero and low emissions (ZLEV) bonus allows carmakers to have less stringent CO₂ targets when they sell more than 25% of vehicles emitting less than 50 gCO₂/km. Eco-innovation (EI) credits for each OEM/pool are extracted from the 2023 final EEA data and assumed constant. As ICE sales decrease, maintaining the same contribution from EI level implies that OEMs would increase the share of ICEs fitted with EIs. An increase in savings per ICE is expected from 2025 onwards due to the inclusion of air conditioning improvements in the scope of EI technologies.Pooling: The Tesla and Mercedes pools are defined based on the M1 pooling list from the 15th March 2025. We assume that the Renault Group would join Nissan and Mitsubishi in a pool, as done every year since 2020. Leapmotor is included in the Stellantis Group because they operate as part of a joint venture.●●●●28Published: September 2025Authors: Lucien Mathieu, Sofía Navas Gohlke, Yoann GimbertEditeur responsable: William Todts, Executive Director. T&E EV progress report – 2025Further informationYoann GimbertE-mobility | BlueSky | LinkedInAcknowledgementsThe findings and views put forward in this publication are the sole responsibility of the authors listed above.29
