---
id: ad8287d3-151f-58c8-b637-eac6158b0ee3
title: "LNG trucks: a dead-end bridge"
date: 2021-09-27T01:00:00
office: Brussels
publication_type: Report
article_url: https://www.transportenvironment.org/articles/lng-trucks-a-dead-end-bridge
pdf_url: https://www.transportenvironment.org/uploads/files/202109_FVT_emission_performance_of_N3_HDVs_final.pdf
doc_ids: [ad8287d3-151f-58c8-b637-eac6158b0ee3]
---

# LNG trucks: a dead-end bridge

> LNG trucks are not a viable solution to reduce emissions, neither in terms of greenhouse gases or air pollutants, on-road tests commissioned by T&E show.

Transport & Environment September 2021 In-house analysis by Transport & Environment Emissions testing by Forschungsgesellschaft für Verbrennungskraftmaschinen und Thermodynamik (FVT) of the Graz University of Technology Authors: Fedor Unterlohner, Anna Krajinska Expert group: Thomas Earl, Simon Suzan, Tiziana Frongia Graphic design: Sofia Alexandridou Editeur responsable: William Todts, Executive Director. LNG Trucks: a dead end bridge. Emissions testing of a diesel- and a gas-powered long-haul truck. Retrieved from from Forschungsgesell-schaft für Verbrennungskraftmaschinen und Thermodynamik (FVT) as well as Moritz Mottschall and Peter Kasten from Öko-Institut e.V. The findings and views put forward in this publication are the sole responsi-bility of the authors listed above. The same applies to any potential factual errors or methodological flaws. Addendum The executive summary of this report was updated to reflect that the LNG truck emitted 37 times more particles (PN) than those that are measured in official tests. A report by 2Executive Summary The gas industry claims that gas-powered heavy-goods vehicles (HGVs) offer a green alternative to conventional diesel trucks. Truck makers and fuel suppliers alike claim that running on both fossil-derived or renewable methane delivers meaningful greenhouse gas (GHG) and air pollutant emission reductions. Notably trucks running on liquefied natural gas (LNG) are often presented as the only widely available technology today to reduce GHG emissions in the long-haul segment. IVECO, which of the European truck makers is most heavily invested in gas engines, is also a strong advocate of LNG trucks. The truck maker claims that its most recent spark ignition (SI) gas engine reduces tank-to-wheel (TTW) CO2 emissions by 15% with fossil-derived methane. In terms of air pol-lutant benefits, IVECO states savings of nitrogen dioxide (NO2) emissions by 90%, and particulate matter (PM) by 95% compared to diesel. To determine whether the suggested emissions savings can be achieved in the real world, T&E com-missioned the Graz University of Technology to undertake testing of a conventional diesel truck and a gas-powered LNG truck, both manufactured by IVECO. This report presents the TTW GHG and air pollutant emissions performance of the two vehicles on real-world driving cycles as well as the expected well-to-tank (WTT) and well-to-wheel (WTW) GHG emissions. In addition, the report also examines the cost, availability and scalability challenges of sustainably sourced biomethane and renewables-based synthetic methane. The report finds that gas trucks are not a viable solution to reduce emissions, neither in terms of GHGs nor air pollutants. LNG truck fails to reduce GHG emissions In terms of the WTW GHG performance, the tested LNG truck delivered much lower emissions savings than claimed by IVECO. Over a 100-year global warming potential (GWP), the LNG truck achieved a GHG reduction of 7.5% compared to the tested diesel truck. When looking at a 20-year GWP time frame, the LNG truck had higher emissions than the diesel truck, resulting in 13.4% higher GHGs. A report by 3These findings run contrary to the industry's claims that gas-powered trucks constitute a viable 'bridge technology' which could deliver meaningful GHG reductions both in the short- and long-term. As the results of this testing project highlight, betting on LNG trucks is counterproductive. The significantly higher global warming potential of methane over 20 years, compared to a 100-year timeframe, means that increasing the number of LNG trucks on European roads today would actu-ally lead to an increase in global warming over the next few decades compared to the alternatives. Renewable methane: neither scalable nor affordable Neither sustainable biomethane nor synthetic methane produced from renewable electricity will be sufficiently scalable or affordable to be a viable solution for decarbonising trucking. Even with ex-tremely high subsidies, up to six times the retail price of fossil gas, the available biomethane feed-stock in the six biggest European countries would only meet 4% to 28% of the expected road freight energy consumption in 2050. It is therefore not credible to take into account any hypothetical GHG savings from renewable methane when quantifying the emissions performance of gas-powered trucks today or in the future. LNG truck worsens air pollution Gas trucks are not a credible solution for reducing air pollutant emissions and improving air quality either. Contrary to IVECO's claims that the LNG truck can deliver large reductions in PM emissions, A report by 4the testing results are showing that particle emissions from LNG trucks, both particle mass and par-ticle number, can be higher than those from diesel trucks. The tested LNG truck emitted particularly large amounts of very small particles – 37 times more than the regulated ones – which are increas-ingly considered as the most harmful to human health. While overall NOx emissions were reduced compared to diesel, emissions during urban operation were close to the legal limits. This provides further evidence that gas-powered trucks are not a low-emission option and will not improve air quality in cities and urban areas, where pollution has the biggest adverse impact on human health. Conclusion: focus on zero-emission trucking Continuing the investment in LNG trucks and infrastructure carries a high risk of stranded assets and would create a fossil fuel lock-in due to the lack of renewable alternatives. As long as some vehicle manufacturers, hauliers and infrastructure operators continue to invest in this technology, they will have a vested interest to protect those investments. Since there will not be enough renewable me-thane available at competitive costs, even by 2050, the industry would instead need to rely on fossil gas in order to meet increasing fuel demand from gas-powered trucks. Spending time and money on a technology which can deliver little climate benefit and actually in-creases emissions over the coming decades is not compatible with the European Green Deal or the A report by 5Paris Agreement. Instead, the EU and its Member States should end their harmful subsidies for gas trucks and focus exclusively on zero-emission vehicles. Policy recommendations Alternative Fuels Infrastructure Regulation (AFIR) The EU should aim for an ambitious AFIR that focuses exclusively on electricity and renewable hy-drogen, effectively removing gas refuelling (both CNG and LNG) from the scope and turning it into a Zero Emission Infrastructure Regulation (ZEIR). This will ensure that infrastructure investment in the EU is made ready for zero-emission trucks. Energy Taxation Directive (ETD) Many Member States still give tax breaks to fossil gas used in transport despite the lack of environ-mental benefits. It is welcomed that, as part of the revision of the ETD, the European Commission has proposed to remove the possibility of tax exemptions or reductions for fossil gas used as a transport fuel. The proposed minimum excise duty rate for both fossil gas and 'non-sustainable' bi-ogas should be set at the same level as petrol and diesel right from the start of the transitional pe-riod. EURO VII emission standards The European Commission is set to put forward a proposal for a EURO VII Regulation in order to reduce toxic pollution from ICE trucks. As a priority, the upcoming proposal should include: ● A reduction of the emission limits for all regulated pollutants to the lowest levels that are tech-nically feasible. This should include a reduction of the PM number emissions limit to levels which require the fitting of particle filters to gas-powered trucks. A reduction in the methane (CH4) emissions limit for all trucks is also needed. ● The introduction of limits for all pollutants that are harmful to health or the environment and can be effectively regulated at the tailpipe. This should include limits for currently unregu-lated pollutants such as smaller than 23 nanometer particles and the potent greenhouse gas nitrous oxide (N2O). ● Emission tests which fully cover all driving conditions including cold start (when the engine is first started) and low-speed, low-load urban driving to ensure that emission limits are re-spected under all possible driving conditions. A report by 6CO2 standards Neither more efficient diesel nor gas trucks are a solution for decarbonising trucking or improving air quality. This will require a rapid increase in the supply of zero-emission trucks beyond what truck manufacturers have to deliver under the current European CO2 standards for new HDVs. The review of the CO2 standards, which is planned for 2022, needs to ensure at least 50% zero-emis-sion truck sales by 2030. This is in line with recent public announcements by European truck manu-facturers, which already aim for ZEV sales shares between 40% and 50% by the same date. The EU should also adopt a 100% CO2 reduction target by 2035 for the vast majority of trucks. National level EU Member States should end fleet renewal, special depreciation and purchase incentives for gas-powered trucks. Other subsidies such as road charge exemptions and fuel duty reductions should also be phased out. A report by 7Table of contents Executive Summary Table of contents List of acronyms 1. Introduction 2. LNG truck market in the EU 2.1. LNG fuel market 2.2. Gas engine technologies 2.3. OEM market shares 3. Emissions testing 3.1. Test vehicles 3.2. Test cycles 4. GHG analysis 4.1. Tank-to-wheel GHG emissions 4.1.1. Tailpipe GHG emissions 4.1.1.1. Carbon dioxide 4.1.1.2. Methane 4.1.1.3. Nitrous oxide 4.1.2 Non-tailpipe GHG emissions 4.2. Well-to-tank GHG emissions 4.3. Well-to-wheel GHG emissions 5. Renewable methane 5.1. Biomethane 5.2. Synthetic methane 6. Air pollutant emissions 6.1. Particles 6.1.1. Particle mass 6.1.2. Particle number 6.1.2.1. PM number >23 nanometers 6.1.2.2. PM number >4 nanometers 6.2 Nitrogen oxides 7. Conclusions A report by 88. Policy recommendations 8.1. EU level 8.2. National level Annex References A report by 9List of acronyms CCS CH4 CI CNG CO CO2 CO2e DAC E-fuels gCO2e GHG GVW GWP HC HDV HGV HPDI ISC LNG NO NOx NO2 N2O PEMS PM PN SCR SI SMR TTW VECTO WTT WTW ZEV ZLEV Carbon capture and storage Methane Compressed ignition Compressed natural gas Carbon monoxide Carbon dioxide Carbon dioxide equivalent Direct air-capture Electrofuels Grams of carbon dioxide equivalent Greenhouse gas Gross vehicle weight Global warming potential Hydrocarbons Heavy-duty vehicle Heavy-goods vehicle High-pressure direct injection In-service conformity Liquefied natural gas Nitrogen oxide Nitrogen oxides Nitrogen dioxide Nitrous oxide Portable emissions measurement system Particle mass Particle number Selective catalyst reduction Spark ignition Steam methane reforming Tank-to-wheel Vehicle Energy Consumption Calculation Tool Well-to-tank Well-to-wheel Zero-emission vehicle Zero- and low-emission vehicle A report by 101. Introduction The European Union has adopted its first-ever CO2 emission performance standards for new heavy-duty vehicles (HDVs) in 2019, requiring European truck manufacturers to reduce their average fleet emissions by 15% by 2025 and 30% by 2030.1 To enable the EU to meet its climate target of reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by at least 55% in 2030 and to fully decarbonise the road freight sector in the long-term, these reduction targets will need to be considerably increased as part of the upcoming review in 2022. The European Commission will also bring forward a legislative proposal this year for more stringent air pollu-tant emissions standards for trucks to replace the current EURO VI Regulation.2,3 The urgency to achieve quick and deep emission cuts and offer a viable decarbonisation pathway by mid-decade poses challenges to the road freight sector in Europe. The gas industry claims that gas-powered heavy-goods vehicles (HGVs) offer a green alternative to conventional diesel trucks. Truck manufacturers and fuel suppliers alike claim that running on both fossil-derived or renewable methane delivers meaning-ful GHG and air pollutant emission reductions. What's more, trucks running on liquefied natural gas (LNG) are often presented as the only widely available technology today to reduce GHG emissions in the long-haul segment.i A key defence of gas technology by the industry continues to be the argument that gas-powered trucks constitute a 'bridge technology', which could deliver swift emissions reductions in the short-term and, based on renewable-based methane, provide a viable decarbonisation pathway to zero emissions in the long-term. Notably IVECO, which of the European truck makers is most heavily invested in gas engines, is also a strong advocate of the 'bridge technology' approach: '[Our] path to carbon neutrality starts with natural gas and proceeds through LNG, the bridge to hydrogen, and Bio-LNG, the rocket launcher to the final destination: a full choice of solutions for a green mobility'.4 This position is rooted in IVECO's claims that its most recent spark ignition (SI) gas engine reduces tank-to-wheel (TTW) CO2 emissions by 15% with fossil-derived methane. Similarly for short term savings, Scania declares CO2 reductions of 20% with spark ignition natural gas compared to diesel.5 Volvo, the only Euro-pean truck maker selling compression ignition gas trucks, states that a CO2 reduction of up to 20% at the tailpipe is achievable with its high-pressure direct injection (HPDI) technology.6 The Natural & bio Gas Ve-hicle Association (NGVA Europe), the leading gas vehicle lobby group in Europe, claims well-to-wheel (WTW) GHG savings of 6% for SI engines and 15% for Volvo's HPDI technology.7 All three truck manufacturers as well as NGVA Europe refer to TTW CO2 savings of up to % when natural gas is replaced by biomethane.ii,8,9 NGVA Europe furthermore points towards the potential of i Onboard fuel storage of methane can be in the form of compressed (CNG) or liquefied natural gas (LNG). The fuel is subsequently gasified and combusted in a modified internal combustion engine. Since long-haul trucks usually require longer vehicle ranges, gas-powered tractor trailers are usually equipped with LNG tanks. ii Depending on the feedstock and production pathway. A report by 11power-to-methane, that is synthetic methane produced from renewable electricity, as a viable long-term solution towards decarbonisation.10 In terms of air pollutant benefits, IVECO states savings of nitrogen dioxide (NO2) emissions by 90%, and particulate matter (PM) by 95% compared to diesel.11,12 NGVA Europe claims that gas vehicles emit up to 95% less PM and up to 70% less NOx compared to the EURO VI emission standard for HDVs.13 The German industry association Zukunft Gas reports that LNG trucks would reduce nitrogen oxides (NOx) by 80 - 90% and 'particles' by almost 100%.14 Can LNG trucks live up to these claims and offer a solution to the decarbonisation challenge and improve air quality? To determine whether the suggested emissions savings can be achieved in the real world, T&E commissioned the Forschungsgesellschaft für Verbrennungskraftmaschinen und Thermodynamik (FVT), a spin-off company of the Institute of Internal Combustion Engines and Thermodynamics of Graz University of Technology, to undertake testing of a conventional diesel truck and a gas-powered LNG truck, both manufactured by IVECO. This report presents the TTW GHG and air pollutant emissions performance of the two vehicles on real-world driving cycles as well as the expected well-to-tank (WTT) and well-to-wheel (WTW) GHG emissions based on the latest work of the JEC consortium consisting of the European Commission's Joint Research Centre, EUCAR (the European council for Automotive Research and development) and Concawe (the sci-entific body of the European Refiners' Association for environment, health and safety in refining and dis-tribution).15 In addition, the report also examines the cost, availability and scalability challenges of sus-tainably sourced biomethane and renewables-based synthetic methane. 2. LNG truck market in the EU In recent years, LNG trucks in the HGV segment above 3.5 tonnes gross vehicle weight (GVW) have wit-nessed an increased level of attention by industry stakeholders and policy-makers. Three major European truck manufacturers - IVECO, Scania and Volvo - have invested in the technology and continue to promote it, while others, including Daimler, MAN and DAF see no future for gas-powered trucks and instead focussed their investments on zero-emission vehicles (ZEVs).16,17,18 Mainly due to subsidies, sales of CNG and LNG trucks have increased significantly over the past decade, with annual growth rates roughly doubling in recent years and reaching close to 3% of total vehicle sales (see Figure 1).19,20 This has been followed by a marked increase in LNG refueling infrastructure. According to NGVA Europe, the number of LNG refuelling stations operating in Europe has more than doubled from 200 in 2019 to 421 today, with the majority of them being located in Italy, Spain, Germany and France.21,22 A report by 122.1. LNG fuel market Liquefying natural gas requires its purification and upgrading to remove non-methane components as well as electricity input equivalent to 8% of the energy content of the LNG produced.23 Shipping LNG to Europe offers an alternative to piped natural gas imports and can build upon a global network of production and export locations, long-distance shipping routes as well as multiple European import and regasification ter-minals.24 European LNG imports are either immediately regasified at the import terminal and injected into the natural gas grid or further distributed in their liquefied state, for example via road by tanker trucks to LNG refuelling stations for HGVs.25 Besides fossil-derived LNG imports from overseas, there is a small number of so-called micro liquefaction plants for liquefied biomethane.26 Two larger-scale liquefaction plants are planned to begin operation within the next few years and supply liquefied biomethane to the gas-powered HGV vehicle fleet across North-Western Europe.27,28 It is therefore reasonable to assume that the current European LNG truck fleet A report by 13is almost exclusively fuelled by LNG imports from overseas. This has also been the case for this testing project (see Section. Gas engine technologies Gas-powered trucks can either be equipped with a spark ignition (SI) or a dual-fuel compression ignition (CI) engine, which can also be combined with the HPDI technology.29 SI engines are wholly methane pow-ered while the dual-fuel CI engine is primarily powered by methane and uses small amounts of diesel as a pilot fuel to ignite the fuel-air mix.30 Compared to conventional diesel engines, there is a reduced fuel effi-ciency of around 10% with CI engines or 15% to 20% with SI engines, whereas combining CI engines with the latest HPDI technology - as Volvo has done - is claimed to eliminate these efficiency losses.31,32,33 2.3. OEM market shares Since 2019, truck manufacturers and Member States are required to monitor and report the CO2 emissions and fuel consumption of newly registered HDVs which are subject to certification requirements under EU's Certification Regulation for HDVs.34,35 The monitoring and reporting data is published by the European En-vironmental Agency (EEA) on an annual basis.36 Based on the data from the first reporting period (July 2019 - June 2020), it is possible to gain a deeper insight into the EU's truck market. A report by 1496% of all new gas trucks, and more than 99% of those in the long-haul segment, were manufactured by IVECO, Scania and Volvo, with IVECO accounting for almost half of all new registrations (see Figure 2). De-spite the greater efficiency of CI HPDI gas engines, SI technology continues to dominate the EU market. 84% of new gas-powered trucks that sold during the first reporting period from July 2019 to June 2020 were equipped with a SI engine, while the remaining were dual-fuel engines with HPDI technology (see Figure 3). Over 80% of all gas trucks were certified as vehicles belonging to the long-haul segment. For IVECO, vehi-cles with gas engines accounted for almost a third (27%) of their total long-haul truck sales, far more than for Scania and Volvo (5% and 3%). Historical sales data also shows that the share of gas-powered trucks in IVECO's long-haul fleet has been continuously rising since 2016.37 A report by 15It is evident that SI engines and IVECO in particular are dominating the market. LNG trucks are increasingly becoming one of IVECO's main compliance strategies to meet its average fleet reduction target under the CO2 standards for new HDVs. And although Volvo's dual-fuel HPDI technology may offer increased fuel ef-ficiency and CO2 benefits, it only plays a negligible role in practice as most vehicle purchasers are opting for the SI engine technology, most likely due to its lower purchase costs. Given IVECO's dominance of the EU gas truck market, it was decided to test IVECO's SI LNG truck for this project as it is the best-selling LNG long-haul truck on the market today. 3. Emissions testing At the beginning of 2021, T&E commissioned FVT to undertake testing of two trucks: a conventional diesel and an SI LNG tractor trailer in order to compare their GHG and air pollutant emissions performance under different driving conditions. Laboratory-based chassis dyno testing was undertaken to ensure the greatest A report by 16comparability between the tests and to eliminate test-to-test variability and differences in ambient condi-tions such as temperature and humidity which typically occurs during on-road testing. 3.1. Test vehicles Two IVECO tractor trailers with a maximum GVW of 40 tonnes, typically used for regional delivery and long-haul haulage, were chosen for the testing project and sourced independently of T&E by FVT. The truck specifications were matched as closely as possible based on model availability on the rental market at the start of the project (see Table 1). Both test vehicles are equipped with a 12-gear AMT transmission system. While the vehicle mileage is higher for the diesel truck, the vehicle is less than a third of the way through the emission durability period of 700,000 km required by the EURO VI Regulation and significantly lower the typical lifetime mileage of a long-haul tractor in the EU which is estimated to be 1.47 million km on average.38 It is therefore representative of the typical long-haul tractor operating on European roads and is expected to perform well both in terms of pollutant emissions as well as fuel consumption. The gas truck was the highest mileage truck available for rental at the start of the testing project. Based on FVT's experience of testing new-generation trucks, this mileage is sufficient to ensure that the emissions performance of the truck has stabilised and as such is representative of the typical on-road performance of such vehicles. This is supported by the work recently presented by FVT as part of the CLOVE consortium which proposes that for the future EURO VII Regulation, a mileage of 3,000 km is sufficient for HDV compli-ance testing.39 Vehicle Year of reg-istration GVW (t) Payload (t) Engine (L) Rated power (kW) Mileage (km) Axle and body configuration IVECO Stralis EURO VI - D IVECO S-Way EURO VI - D,224 4x2 tractor (Die-sel) 338 7,500 4x2 tractor (SI LNG) Table 1. Truck specifications Gross vehicle weight was kept constant for both vehicles and test cycles at a total of 28 tonnes GVW, equal to around 50% of the maximum possible payload. As the vehicle curb weight of the LNG truck was 100 kg higher, the payload of the LNG truck was adjusted downwards to 12.4 tonnes compared to 12.5 tonnes for the diesel truck. A report by 17IVECO S-Way SI LNG IVECO Stralis Diesel 3.2. Test cycles Two different cold start test cycles, representative of a typical regional delivery supermarket and long-haul duty cycle, were developed by FVT. Each vehicle was tested once on each cycle. The first test cycle, the in-service conformity (ISC) test, is based on a typical on-road ISC testing route used to check for pollutant emissions compliance and covers urban, rural and motorway driving. The second test cycle, the regional test, is representative of a regional supermarket delivery cycle and is based on an on-road test profile. The speed profile of the base on-road test is modelled to mimic the engine dyno regional delivery cycle which was developed for the Vehicle Energy Consumption Calculation Tool (VECTO). It includes a mixture of urban, rural and some motorway driving, with idling brakes in between designed to simulate typical stops for (un)loading, for example at a supermarket. Test cy-cle Distance (km) Time (min) Driving share Average speed (km/h) Urban Rural Motorway Urban Rural Motorway ISC Regional 15% 29% 56% % 51% 23% Table 2. Composition of the ISC and regional test cycle A report by 18To prevent the vehicle tyres from overheating and, thus, invalidating the test procedure, each test was split into two separate test cycles as shown in Figure 4 and 5 with a break in between each test cycle to cool off the tyres. To exclude the cold start from the second test cycle, each truck was driven on a warm-up cycle at motorway speeds of above 70 km/h for at least 7 minutes just before the start of the second test cycle. The emissions measured during the warm-up cycle are not included in the analysis of the results. This method allows for the incorporation of long constant motorway driving without the cold start effects. The test results presented in this report as the ISC and regional tests contain the combined results of the 1st and 2nd test cycle for each test respectively. A report by 19Chassis dynamometer driving resistance parameters were set according to FVT's internal database that contains real-world parameters for different vehicle and tyre types and the organisation's own expertise from its work on the development of VECTO for the European Commission. The driving resistance param-eters were set equal for both vehicles because both vehicles are long-haul tractors of the newest genera-tion. Each vehicle was tested on standard EU pump-grade diesel and LNG fuel, the physical properties of which are listed in Section 4.2. Regulated pollutant emissions including nitrogen oxides (NO, NO2 and NOx), methane (CH4), hydrocarbons (HC), carbon monoxide (CO) as well as CO2 were measured continuously at the tailpipe at 1 Hz frequency using an AVL M.O.V.E Portable Emissions Measurement System (PEMS). Particle mass (PM) emissions were measured using the gravimetric filter method. Particle number (PN) emissions were measured using con-densation particle counters (CPCs) with cut off size thresholds of >23 nanometers, >10 nanometers and >4 nanometers combined with the DownToTen (DTT) exhaust dilution system. Non-regulated nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions were measured continuously at 1 hertz frequency using a MKS 2030 HS Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) measurement device. 4. GHG analysis Use of gas in road transport results in GHG emissions from multiple sources including the tailpipe as well as upstream from the production, processing, transport and distribution of methane. GHG emissions com-prise of CO2 and the more potent greenhouse gases methane and nitrous oxide which have a much greater heat trapping ability in the atmosphere than CO2. For the analysis of the climate impact of the two trucks A report by 20tested, the global warming potential (GWP) - a measure of how powerful a climate warming agent is com-pared to CO2 - of both 20 and 100 years is used. The GWP values used are listed in Table 3 and are based on the Fifth Assessment Report of the IPCC.40 Greenhouse gas Carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) 20-year GWP 100-year GWP Carbon dioxide (CO2) Methane (CH4) Nitrous oxide (N2O) Table 3. GWP values This section presents the tailpipe GHG emissions results of the two trucks tested followed by tank-to-wheel (both tailpipe and non-tailpipe) and well-to-tank emissions to determine the total well-to-wheel emis-sions. The calculations were undertaken based on the test data and relevant literature sources and reflect the GHG emissions performance on a gCO2e/km basis to ensure compatibility with the literature sources which were used to determine the non-tailpipe tank-to-wheel as well as well-to-tank GHGs, including the latest work of the JEC consortium. 4.1. Tank-to-wheel GHG emissions Tank-to-wheel (TTW) GHGs include carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide emissions from both tail-pipe and non-tailpipe vehicle sources. CO2 accounts for the majority of the tank-to-wheel GHG emissions. However, methane and nitrous oxide are also emitted in non-negligible amounts. Specific emissions are dependent on the fuel, engine and exhaust emission control used on the truck and vary from vehicle to vehicle. 4.1.1. Tailpipe GHG emissions In the EU, tailpipe CO2 emissions from new trucks are regulated through the CO2 standards which are linked to a vehicle's certified specific CO2 emissions. This value is calculated based on simulations run using VECTO. On-road CO2 emissions may vary from those simulated through VECTO for a variety of reasons, including differences in payload, route, driving style or road or weather conditions. Aside from CO2, the potent greenhouse gases methane and nitrous oxide are also emitted from truck ex-hausts. However, neither is regulated through the CO2 standards. Tailpipe methane emissions are currently regulated through the EU's pollutant emission standards due to its ozone-forming potential but exhaust emissions of nitrous oxide remain unregulated in the EU. A report by. Carbon dioxide CO2 emissions were measured directly at the tailpipe using PEMS equipment. Overall, the LNG truck emit-ted less tailpipe CO2 than the diesel truck on both test cycles. On the ISC test cycle, the LNG truck emitted 925 gCO2/km compared to 1,051 gCO2/km for the diesel truck, a reduction of 11.9%. On the regional test the LNG truck emitted 984 gCO2/km compared to the diesel truck's 1,100 gCO2/km, representing a slightly smaller reduction of 10.6%. While the CO2 reduction measured on these tests tends towards the higher end of the CO2 savings reported in the literature of between 0.5% and 12%, it is close to the 10.1% reduction reported by TNO in 2018 when the on-road CO2 emissions of two LNG trucks were measured.41,. Methane Slip of unburned methane from the tailpipe of gas trucks is a well-known issue. Particularly high methane emissions can occur when the engine is first started (the so-called cold start) before the three-way catalyst reaches sufficiently high temperatures which are required to convert methane into CO2 and water. The LNG truck emitted 0.15 gCH4/km during the ISC test cycle and 0.31 gCH4/km during the regional test cycle. The diesel truck's emissions were less than 0.001 gCH4/km during both test cycles. When converted A report by 22to gCH4/kWh, all test results were below the methane tailpipe emission limit of 0.75 gCH4/kWh applicable to on-road tests.iii 4.1.1.3. Nitrous oxide Nitrous oxide emissions are generally more of a problem for diesel engines. The use of selective catalytic reduction (SCR) systems to reduce NOx emissions from diesel vehicles has been shown to increase the emissions of N2O due to side reactions between the ammonia (AdBlue) used to reduce NO, NO2 and oxygen present in the exhaust gases. N2O is also produced in the ammonia slip catalyst fitted to diesel vehicles to reduce their ammonia emissions. The LNG truck emitted 0.006 gN2O/km during the ISC test cycle and 0.015 gN2O/km during the regional test cycle. The diesel truck's emissions were significantly higher at 0.165 gN2O/km and 0.307 gN2O/km respec-tively. The total tailpipe GHG emissions are summed up in Figure 8. iii This is based on the 0.5g/kWh WHTC limit multiplied by the PEMS conformity factor of 1.5. It should be noted that these tests are not type-approval test cycles with a higher share of cold start and urban driving repre-sented than on the type-approval ISC test. As such, official compliance with in-service conformity testing re-quirements cannot be verified. A report by 234.1.2 Non-tailpipe GHG emissions While the tailpipe is the main source of GHG emissions from gas trucks with SI engines, it is not the only one. Methane is also emitted in non-negligible amounts from non-tailpipe sources, however these emis-sions are not included in the CO2 standards for new HDVs and their impact on the climate is therefore cur-rently not regulated.iv These sources include: Boil-off LNG is stored as a very cold, compressed liquid within the onboard storage tank. Although the tank is insulated to prevent heat from the surrounding environment warming up the LNG, over time this does nonetheless occur. The heat transfer causes the stored LNG to gradually evaporate, also known as boil-off, which increases the pressure within the tank. To prevent the tank from reaching too high a pressure, safety valves are fitted to the tank to vent the evaporated methane to the am-bient air. iv CI HPDI gas engines have additional sources of non-tailpipe GHG emissions such as crankcase emissions. As these do not apply to SI gas engines, they are not covered in this report. A report by 24Refuelling During the refuelling process, LNG can also escape to the atmosphere either from leaks from the filling nozzles or due to manual venting of boil-off emissions (gas state LNG) from inside the tank which are replaced by the liquid state LNG during the refuelling process. The amount of manual venting can be reduced by ensuring that the pump refuelling pressure is sufficient, venting the boil off into a container at the station before the start of refuelling or using a vent line (either within the nozzle or separately attached) to return any boil off back to the station. However, even with the use of these technologies some manual venting can occur. According to NGVA Europe, the attach-ment of vent lines from the truck to the filling station is optional which when not used could result in unnecessary manual venting.43 Maintenance Maintenance of the fuel system during the lifetime of the truck also requires residual LNG to be vented. Any work on tanks themselves or components which are directly connected to the tanks requires all LNG to be removed from the system before performing any work which means that the LNG tank is no longer at the required temperature for LNG storage. When the tank is refilled, there is a quick increase in pressure from the evaporation of LNG in the hot tank which, for safety rea-sons, results in additional venting to the atmosphere.44 The process of measuring non-tailpipe emissions is complex and requires additional equipment and facil-ities, which fell outside of the resources available to this project. As such, non-tailpipe emissions were not measured during this testing programme. Mottschall et al. estimates that for SI LNG trucks, methane emis-sions emitted from non-tailpipe sources are equal to around 5.1% of total tailpipe GHG emissions based on a 100-year GWP of 30.45 Calculating this based on a 100-year GWP of 28 as used in this report, this would be equivalent to 4.8% of tailpipe CO2 emissions. Calculating it based on a 20-year GWP of 84, this would be equal to 14.3%. The non-tailpipe methane emissions of the tested LNG truck were calculated based on these estimates and the measured CO2 tailpipe emissions of the LNG truck. The total tank-to-wheel GHG emissions including non-tailpipe sources are summed up in Figure 9. A report by 254.2. Well-to-tank GHG emissions As it is the case for conventional diesel, GHGs are also emitted upstream during the extraction, processing, transport and distribution of methane. These are generally referred to as well-to-tank (WTT) emissions and usually account for a lower share of total Well-to-wheel (WTW) GHG emissions for combustion engine trucks. In this section the energy density, fuel consumption and subsequently the WTT emissions of both trucks are calculated. To calculate the WTT emissions of the two trucks tested, the two most suitable production pathways of the latest WTW Study conducted by the JEC consortium were chosen as they are the most representative of the diesel and LNG available on the EU market.46 The JEC's WTW Study evaluates the WTW energy use and GHG emissions for a wide range of powertrains and fuels production pathways in the European context. It should be noted, however, that the JEC study is not taking into account any LNG imports from the U.S. and Russia which are typically composed of larger shares of shale gas from hydraulic fracturing (U.S.) and prone to higher fugitive methane emissions.47 WTT emissions from LNG trucks may therefore be underes-timated in their work and, thus, in the subsequent calculations. A report by 26Fuel production pathways For the diesel truck, this is the WTT pathway 'COD1' which represents conventional diesel and its associ-ated GHG emissions from typical crude oil production, transport by sea, refining in the EU, distribution and retail. For the LNG truck, the reference used is the 'GRLG1' pathway. This assumes that natural gas is lique-fied at the source and transported as LNG by sea and road. Since the JEC calculates the climate impact of methane and nitrous oxide WTT emissions on the basis of the older GWP values from the Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC, the GHG emissions of the two WTT pathways have been adjusted to align with the GWP values from the IPCC's Fifth Assessment Report as used in the preceding sections.48 Fuel energy density For the calculation of the fuel consumption of the two vehicles and subsequently the WTT emissions of LNG and diesel, the energy density of the respective fuel must be known. A sample of the diesel fuel used during this testing programme was analysed by an independent laboratory to obtain the exact fuel char-acteristics including the energy density. A sample of the LNG test fuel could not be safely obtained or stored due to the sample extraction and stor-age requiring sufficient pressure to keep the LNG liquefied. To get around this issue, certificates of analysis of the two most recent fuel deliveries prior to the refuelling event of the LNG truck were obtained from the LNG refuelling station. The LNG of both deliveries was loaded at the LNG terminal in Zeebrugge. Date of deliv-ery Nitrogen (N2) Methane (CH4) Ethane (C2H6) Propane (C3H8) Butane (C4H10) Pentane (C5H12) 17 April April 0.0014 Table 4. Molar composition of the two LNG test fuel deliveries The energy density was then calculated from the molar chemical composition shown in Table 4 obtained from the certificate of conformity. The resulting average of the two deliveries is used as the lower heating value of the LNG test fuel. The lower heating values of both the diesel and LNG test fuels are listed in Table 5 and are closely aligned with the calorific values of the WTT production pathways from the JEC. A report by 27Lower heating value (LHV) Diesel LNG JEC WTT pathway 43.1 MJ/kg 49.1 MJ/kg Test fuel 42.5 MJ/kg 49.6 MJ/kg Table 5. LHV of the JEC WTT pathways and the test fuels Fuel consumption The fuel consumption of the test vehicles were subsequently calculated from the CO2 emissions measured by the PEMS equipment and the lower heating values of the diesel and LNG test fuels. The observed fuel consumption is relatively high compared to the simulated and certified fuel consumption under VECTO. According to FVT, the main reasons for this are differences between the test cycles and the VECTO long-haul and regional delivery cycles such as a different speed profile and road gradient. Both cycles are based on on-road tests but cold start and urban driving represent a higher share of these tests compared to compliant ISC tests, though such differences occur normally during on-road driving. In fact, certified fuel consumption values under VECTO need to be verified annually by manufacturers through an on-road test based on the so-called verification testing procedure (VTP). The vehicle passes the on-road test if the measured fuel consumption is lower than the certified VECTO simulation result while taking into account a tolerance of up to 7.5%.49 Fuel consumption L_diesel/100km kg_LNG/100km MJ/km Table 6. Fuel consumption ISC test Regional test Diesel SI LNG Diesel SI LNG.9 17.8 Results Based on the lower heating value of the two WTT production pathways and the measured fuel consump-tion, the WTT GHG emissions in gCO2e/km for the 20-year and 100-year GWP were calculated. Well-to-tank A report by 28emissions of the LNG truck are slightly higher on a gCO2e/km basis than those of the diesel truck, and sig-nificantly higher over a 20-year horizon due to the increased methane leakage from the extraction of nat-ural gas and the inland distribution of LNG via tanker truck as well as due to the electricity input for the liquefaction process from on-site gas power plants. 4.3. Well-to-wheel GHG emissions When adding the WTT and TTW (non-)tailpipe GHGs together, the tested LNG truck delivered much lower GHG savings than claimed by IVECO. Over a 100-year GWP, the LNG truck achieved GHG savings of 7.5% and 7.9% compared to the tested diesel truck. When looking at a 20-year GWP time frame, the LNG truck caused significantly higher emissions than the diesel truck, resulting in a 13.4% and 13.6% increase in GHGs respectively. A report by 295. Renewable methane Substituting fossil-derived natural gas with renewable-based methane is often suggested as an effective way to reduce GHGs from gas-powered vehicles. As the chemical composition of fossil-, bio- or electricity-based methane is essentially identical when purified and upgraded for the use as a transport fuel, the same gas engines can be used regardless of the methane source.50 Advanced biomethane from waste and residue feedstocks and synthetic methane produced from renewa-ble electricity, also known as e-methane, are commonly considered as the most viable production path-ways for renewable methane (see Table 7). Both options face challenges, albeit to varying degrees, in re-gards to their cost-effectiveness, scalability, time- and space-related deployment limitations as well as sectoral competition. This section discusses in detail those challenges that renewable methane faces as a transport fuel for trucks. A report by 30High-GHG GHG-neutral Natural gas produced from both conventional and unconventional sources Power-to-methane produced from grid electricity bearing upstream generation emissions without car-bon capture and storage (CCS) Biomethane produced from pur-pose grown-crops with high direct or indirect land-use change (ILUC) emissions Fossil-derived methane Renewable methane Power-to-methane produced from electricity bearing up-stream generation emissions in a process that captures all fugi-tive upstream GHGs and pro-cess CO2 through CCS Power-to-methane produced from additional renewable electricity with zero GHGs and CO2 from direct air-capture (DAC) Biomethane produced from sustainable and advanced feed-stocks whose avoided methane emissions offset or exceed pro-duction and combustion GHGs Table 7. Methane production pathways. Adapted from Searle et al. (. Biomethane Biomethane, renewable methane purified and upgraded from biogas, could theoretically be an effective instrument to reduce GHG emissions from gas-powered trucks. Whereas first-generation crop-based feed-stocks should not be considered for the production of methane due to their high emissions from direct and indirect land use change as well as other negative environmental impacts such as land conflicts, advanced waste- and residue-based biomethane (produced from anaerobic digestion or biomass gasification) could deliver strong GHG reductions if stringent sustainability criteria are ensured. Feedstock availability However, the availability of suitable waste- and residue-based feedstocks for the production of bio-methane is limited and insufficient to displace a significant share of the energy demand from HGVs in Eu-rope. Searle et al. estimated the maximum sustainable biomethane potential at different cost levels in dif-ferent European countries. The study accounted for total lifecycle GHG emissions and considered bio-methane production from anaerobic digestion of livestock manure and wastewater sludge as well as the A report by 31gasification and methanation of sustainably harvested agricultural and forestry residues as those feed-stocks can have no or even slightly negative GHG emissions and are therefore considered suitable for the production of sustainable biomethane.52 The study concluded that only a low level of sustainable feedstock would be available at competitive pro-duction costs and that the cost for unlocking additional feedstocks would increase relatively quickly fol-lowing the scale-up of production. In 2050, the six biggest European countries could each supply a theo-retical annual maximum of sustainably sourced biomethane that amounts to:53 Germany United Kingdom France Italy Spain Poland 33.3 TWh 25.6 TWh 14.9 TWh 11.5 TWh 9.7 TWh 4.7 TWh Table 8. Sustainable biomethane potential in 2050 If the HGV fleets of these six countries were fully replaced by gas-powered trucks with CI HPDI engines until 2050, a disproportionately higher volume of biomethane would be needed to fuel those vehicles. In theory, the total production potential listed above could only meet 4% to 28% of the expected final energy con-sumption of the respective country's future HGV fleet in 2050 (see Figure 12).54,55,56,57 A report by 32A report by 33Production costs Profit margins in the haulage industry are low and fuel costs make up a large part of the total cost of own-ership (TCO). Leveraging the total biomethane potential could therefore only be realised with significant policy support. To deliver the volumes quantified by Searle et al., a subsidy level of € 5.89/kg would be necessary in order to reach price parity with fossil-derived compressed natural gas (CNG) for transport. With average retail prices for CNG ranging from € 0.77/kg to € 1.25/kg in the six examined countries, the required subsidy would be around six times the equivalent of the fossil price, even before additional cost premiums due to liquefaction, transport, distribution and storage of LNG are factored in.58 In reality this scenario is highly unlikely. If the entire sustainable biomethane potential was allocated to the road freight sector, nothing would be left for the power, industry or buildings sector. Even if only some of the feedstocks were diverted to producing biomethane for road transport, current biomethane consum-ers, such as the power sector, would need to compete for the limited sustainable feedstocks available. Alongside this, additional costly infrastructure would be needed since, at present, the majority of sustain-able biomass feedstocks are processed and combusted to generate electricity for the grid at decentralised locations. Diverting advanced biomass feedstocks from current uses towards the HGV fleet would require new infrastructure for processing, transporting and distributing the biomethane from those locations which would further increase cost and reduce the economic viability. It must therefore be assumed that no larger share of sustainable biomethane would ever be allocated to the road freight sector in these countries bearing in mind that multiple sectors, many of which already have current users of biomethane, would be competing for it. Retail prices Additionally, the real biomethane production costs discussed above need to be distinguished from today's retail prices of biomethane at the dispenser which are effectively subsidised by a range of national financial incentives, such as fuel mandates, sub-targets or feed-in tariffs, which offset the higher production costs to a larger extent. In Germany, liquefied biomethane can be counted towards the greenhouse gas reduction quota and is therefore a compliance option for fuel suppliers for which they pay the producer.59 The United Kingdom, France and Italy take a different approach, applying a feed-in tariff for biomethane which is injected into the gas grid.60 In 2018, Italy introduced a dedicated sub-target for biomethane starting from 0.45% and rising to 1.39% by 2022. Alongside this, Italy subsidises the construction of biomethane liquefaction plants and new connections from production plants to the gas distribution grid.61 Similarly, advanced bio-methane can be certified under the Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation (RTFO) and is eligible for certifi-cates in the UK which can be sold to fuel suppliers.62 Other fiscal incentives, such as fuel duty reductions, A report by 34also help reduce the cost gap between fossil-derived and biomethane and serve as effective subsidies (see Section 8). Conclusion Given the high price and low availability of biomethane and despite the fact that some limited volumes of biomethane are already used in the road transport sector today, it would be unrealistic to take into ac-count any hypothetical GHG savings from advanced biomethane when quantifying the emissions perfor-mance of gas-powered trucks. 5.2. Synthetic methane Synthetic methane, that is power-to-methane produced from renewable hydrogen and CO2 from direct air-capture (DAC), could theoretically provide a near GHG-neutral pathway for gas-powered trucks. The pro-cess requires hydrogen produced from renewable electricity and CO2 from DAC. These feedstocks are then converted to methane through a process called methanation (or the Sabatier process). The key challenge for synthetic methane is the low energy efficiency of production due to energy conver-sion losses across multiple production steps and the comparatively low efficiency of the internal combus-tion engine resulting in high fuel costs. Alongside this, a lack of meaningful air pollutant emissions reduc-tions and an increased exposure to energy imports from outside Europe due to increased renewable elec-tricity demand makes this decarbonisation option even less attractive. Production costs To quantify possible future fuel prices for synthetic methane, the Agora PtG/PtL calculator was used to calculate the production and import cost of synthetic methane to Germany.63 Two production pathways were considered in the analysis. In the first, the electricity is sourced from offshore wind in the North Sea with connection to domestic e-fuel production plants located near the German coast. The second is from solar photovoltaic in North Africa as the Middle East and North Africa represents a particularly favourable location to produce synthetic methane cheaply due to low renewable electricity costs.v The calculated price of the imported synthetic methane includes the cost of liquefaction, transport via fuel tanker from North Africa (Port Said) to Germany (Port of Wilhelmshaven) and domestic distribution to the refuelling station via tanker truck. Liquefaction, transport and distribution costs are based on Agora Verkehrswende et al. and Bünger et al. v The fuel cost calculations are based on the reference scenario of the Agora PtG/PtL calculator. The weighted average cost of capital (WACC) was set at 6% and DAC was chosen as the CO2-extraction method. Offshore wind in the North Sea, the low-temperature PEM electrolysis as well as methanation plant was set at a load factor of 4,000 full-load hours per year. Solar PV in North Africa as well as low-temperature PEM electrolysis was set at 2,344 full-load hours, whereas the methanation plant was set at 4,000 full-load hours and relies on temporary stationary hydrogen storage. A report by 35For synthetic methane produced from offshore wind in the North Sea, German-specific taxes and levies on the electricity input for the electrolysis and methanation plants are included.vi The currently reduced fuel duty rate for natural gas used as transport fuel of €-cent 13.90/MWh is also included, which will increase to its normal rate of €-cent 30.80/MWh by 2027.64 The calculated final prices at the dispenser range from € 4.16/kg in 2030 to € 2.04/kg in 2050 and are com-parable to literature values including Pfennig et al. and Ueckerdt et al.65,66 The current price of fossil-de-rived LNG in Germany is € 1.13/kg (see Figure 13).67 Future increases in the CO2 price for natural gas as a transport fuel would help close the price gap and make synthetic methane more competitive. Conclusion Even when assuming rapid cost reductions in renewables, electrolysers and fuel production technologies, synthetic methane will likely remain significantly more expensive than fossil-derived methane for decades to come. Likewise, time-related deployment limitations and space constraints in favourable regions as well as potential competition between sectors and countries would make it very challenging to provide any substantial volumes of synthetically produced methane to Europe anytime soon.68 As it is the case for advanced biomethane, it would make just as little sense to take into account any hypo-thetical future GHG savings from synthetic methane when quantifying the emissions performance of gas-powered trucks for the coming decades. vi This applies to all taxes and levies except for the renewables levy ('EEG-Umlage') and the network tariffs ('Netzentgelte') from which renewable hydrogen and its derivatives are currently exempt. A report by 366. Air pollutant emissions Air pollution from road transport is a huge problem across Europe, particularly in cities and urban areas where large amounts of traffic release toxic pollutants from exhausts into the ambient air. The gas vehicle industry, particularly NGVA Europe, has claimed strong air quality benefits when using gas-powered vehi-cles: '[Natural gas emits] virtually none of the pollutants (particle matter and nitrogen oxides) that increas-ingly contaminate the air in areas with dense traffic.'69 IVECO also makes several claims as to the air quality benefits of switching away from diesel to their gas-powered trucks which are covered below. To test the industry's claims, pollutant emissions from both trucks were measured during this testing pro-gramme. This section presents both the particle matter (PM) and particle (PM) number as well as nitrogen oxides (NOx) emissions. To allow for comparison with the EU's pollutant emission limits, all emission re-sults are presented in milligrams or number per kWh. The results have not been post-processed using the moving average window method which is used in the EURO VI Regulation to process test data for emission A report by 37compliance and removes many of the worst-case emissions measured such as those emitted at cold start i.e. when the engine is first started. As what actually matters for air quality is what the truck emits on the road and not simply on paper, the raw test emission results are presented in this section. 6.1. Particles Particle pollution is increasingly seen across Europe as the biggest problem for air quality, with the latest report by the European Environmental Agency showing that progress in the reduction of PM 2.5 pollution (particulate matter smaller than 2.5 micrometer) has effectively stalled at a point where 7 out of 10 resi-dents of European cities breathe air above the World Health Organisation's recommended particle pollu-tion threshold. This is of serious concern to public health as particle pollution causes 379,000 premature deaths in the EU annually and is a contributing cause for a wide range of diseases including Alzheimer's, cancer as well as cardiovascular and respiratory illnesses.70,71,72 Road transport is currently the third biggest source of particle pollution in the EU.73 The gas vehicle indus-try has repeatedly claimed that particle pollution is not a problem for gas-powered trucks and that large reductions in particle emissions can be achieved when switching from diesel to gas engines. IVECO has previously claimed that their Stralis LNG truck emits 99% less PM than an equivalent EURO VI diesel truck.74 However, recent research shows that trucks with gas engines can emit large amounts of particle pollution, especially when it comes to emissions of very small so-called 'ultrafine particles' which are increasingly considered to be potentially the most harmful to human health.75,76 FVT measured currently regulated PM and PM number emissions larger than 23 nanometers of the two trucks. Alongside this, the currently un-regulated PM number smaller than 23 nanometers were also measured. 6.1.1. Particle mass The total mass of particles emitted from a truck's tailpipe is regulated through the PM emission limit. The EURO VI limit for HDVs is set at 10 mg/kWh. When it comes to the PM reductions by switching from diesel to gas engines, IVECO claims that the S-Way LNG truck can reduce PM emissions by up to 95% compared to diesel.77 However, the test results show that these claims are false. The LNG truck tested actually emitted more PM than the diesel truck on three of the four test cycles undertaken with the worst emissions meas-ured occurring during urban driving. A report by 38Measurement of PM emissions The standard technique for measuring PM emissions during emissions tests is to collect the PM emitted out of the tailpipe on filter paper. This filter paper is subsequently weighted at the begin-ning and end of the test to determine the total amount of PM emitted. As emissions are not meas-ured second by second, contrary to how it is done for other pollutants, the results of the two test cycles that make up each complete test cannot be easily split into urban, rural and motorway driv-ing. Therefore, in this section test results from each of the two test cycles that make up the ISC and regional tests are presented separately. During the tests, the LNG truck emitted times more PM than the diesel truck on all test cycles apart from the second regional cycle where emissions were 22% lower compared to the diesel truck. The LNG truck performed particularly badly during urban and rural driving. PM emissions during the first part of the ISC test cycle were 34 mg/kWh. This is more than three times higher than the EURO VI PM emission limit and 3.4 times higher than what was emitted by the diesel truck.vii These findings show that the claims stating that LNG trucks reduce PM emissions compared to diesel trucks are false. LNG trucks can emit more PM than diesel trucks under a wide range of driving conditions and can even exceed the legal PM emission limit on the road. Most concerning are the very high PM emissions above legal limits which were measured during urban and rural driving in the first part of the ISC test. Urban emis-sions occur where people have the highest exposures to air pollution and where PM concentrations in ex-cess of the World Health Organisation's limits occur most often and should therefore be a priority in terms of emissions control. vii This does not necessarily mean that the truck was legally non-compliant as the results were not processed according to the moving average window (MAW) method used for checking on-road emissions compliance with legal limits which averages emissions over the entire test cycle. However, what ultimately matters for air quality and human health is what is emitted out of the tailpipe and not on paper compliance and the MAW method used in the regulation excludes many normal driving conditions including cold start. For EURO VI - D trucks, this would include any emissions which occur when the engine coolant temperature is less than 70 °C. A report by 396.1.2. Particle number Aside from PM emissions, the number of particles emitted from exhausts also matters. This is because it is not just the total mass of particles in the air that determines particle pollution's negative health effects. It is also the size and number of particles that is important. Very small particles, especially ultrafine particles which are less than 100 nanometers in size, are increasingly considered as the most dangerous for health. Medical studies have shown that these particles are able to deposit in the lungs and airways with very high efficiency and, unlike larger particles, can evade the body's immune defences. This means that they are not readily removed and can accumulate within the body.78 Once deposited in the lungs, they can also travel to other areas of the body such as the brain and the placenta.79,80 Medical studies show that even short exposure to these particles can cause changes in heart function81 and these particles have been linked to an increased risk of heart disease and brain cancer.82,83 Ultrafine particle pollution is a problem in the EU and road transport is a major source of these particles. In cities, road transport emits more than any other source and is responsible for over 70% of ultrafine par-ticles emitted.84 However, because these particles are so small, often smaller than a typical virus, they do A report by 40not contribute much to the total particle mass (PM) emitted. So while a truck's PM emissions can be low, the number of particles emitted from that truck can be huge. For example, for ambient air the WHO air quality guideline for PM2.5 is 10 µg/m3. One large 2500 nm particle per cm3 of air will reach this threshold but for ultrafine particles of 20 nanometers in size, 2.4 million particles are needed per cm3.85 To limit the number of particles emitted from trucks aside from a PM limit, trucks' particle emissions are also regulated through a PM number emission limit during type-approval engine testing. The limit of 6 x 1011/kWh includes any solid particles that are larger than 23 nanometers. To ensure compliance with the limit on the road, EURO VI Step E introduces a PM number emission limit to on road (PEMS) testing. This takes place both during type-approval and during the first 700,000 km of a truck and helps ensure on-road compliance with limits. For diesel trucks, the on-road limit for PM number emissions applies from 2021 for new types and from 2022 for all vehicles. However, due to lobbying by gas truck manufacturers86, a derogation was granted to gas trucks to which the limit will only apply two years later by 2023 and 2024 respectively.87 This in effect allows gas trucks to emit more particles than diesel trucks for two additional years. Most importantly, this delays by two years the fitting of particle filter technology, which reduces exhaust particle emissions, to gas trucks which are already standard for diesel trucks. To fully assess and compare particle emissions of different combustion engine technologies, it is important to consider both PM and PM number emissions. This is something that IVECO does not consider. During this testing programme, the PM number emissions of regulated >23 nanometers were measured. It should be noted, however, that as both trucks are of the EURO VI - D emission standard they are not legally re-quired to meet the PM number emission limit on the road, as mentioned previously this only applied to EURO VI - E certified vehicles. To assess the full particle emissions of both trucks, also <23 nanometer par-ticles were measured which are not currently regulated for any internal combustion engines in the EU. 6.1.2.1. PM number >23 nanometers Overall, both trucks emitted less than the legal PM number limit on both tests including in each urban, rural and motorway section of the test.viii However, from the results obtained, it cannot be said that the LNG truck tested emits less particles than the diesel truck as it varies depending on the driving conditions. Over the total ISC test, the LNG truck emitted 8% less >23 nanometer particles. However, over the total regional test, the LNG truck had more than double the particle (+115%) emissions of the diesel truck. viii For emissions measured using the Portable Emissions Measurement System, as is the case for the results presented here, an additional 1.63 conformity factor applies to account for measurement uncertainty. A report by 41The largest difference between the two trucks was measured during urban operation on both tests, which includes the cold start engine warm-up period. Here, the LNG truck performed much worse than the diesel, emitting between 2-3 times more particles. This is in line with previous studies which have found that LNG trucks have particularly high PM number emissions during the cold start period, an effect observed only on some diesel trucks.88 Similarly, the LNG truck performed worse during the rural section of the regional test where it emitted 83% more particles. However, the LNG truck did emit between -62 to -91% less particles during motorway driving as well as -56% less during the rural section of the ISC test. As combined motorway and rural driving accounts for 86% of the total kilometers driven during the ISC test, overall the LNG truck emitted slightly less particles than the diesel truck on this test despite the significantly worse urban emissions performance. On the regional test, urban and rural driving comprised 77% of total kilometers when PM number emissions were higher than the diesel truck resulting in higher overall regional test emission from the LNG truck. A report by 42Generally, these results show that the >23 nanometer PN number emissions of the two trucks are highly dependent on the route and driving style. However, the LNG truck can emit more particles than the diesel truck and as such should not be considered as a cleaner alternative particularly for use in urban and rural areas where the particle emissions of the LNG truck can actually be higher than the diesel. 6.1.2.2. PM number >4 nanometers Particle emissions measured during most emissions' tests, such as the ones discussed above, do not actu-ally include all of the particles released from vehicle exhausts. This is because the current method for meas-uring PM number emissions only includes solid particles larger than 23 nanometers. Particles smaller than this are not included in the measurement. However, tests show that some engine technologies, particularly gas vehicles, can emit more <23 nanometer particles than >23 nanometers.89 This means that for many vehicles the majority of particles emitted out of the exhaust are neither meas-ured nor regulated. This is problematic as it means that the full particle pollution impact of vehicles is not considered. Additionally, the very smallest particles may be the worst for human health as they deposit in the lungs with greater efficiency than larger particles.90 FVT used new particle measurement equipment (DownToTen) to measure the emissions of these small and currently unregulated particles. Two analysers were used to enable the measurement of >10 nanome-ter and >4 nanometer particles. The results of the measurements show that for both trucks, there is a large increase in particles when those smaller than the regulatory 23 nanometer threshold are measured. When it comes to emissions of particles of 4 - 23 nanometer in size, the LNG truck is generally the worst performing, emitting more than the diesel truck on both the ISC and regional tests (see Figure 16). A report by 43The LNG truck also had the largest increase in the total particle count compared to the measurement of just >23 nanometer particles. When all particles bigger than 4 nanometers were measured, the total num-ber of particles from the LNG truck increased by 37 times over the ISC test cycle. This was driven by large increases in the number of particles measured during urban (by 18 times) and rural (by 147 times) driving. In comparison, the increase for the diesel truck was more modest, not exceeding 6 times the measured >23 nanometer particle emissions on any section of either test. The very large emissions of <23 nanometer particles for the LNG truck resulted in the vehicle exceeding the PM number emission limit during urban and rural driving of the ISC test cycle as well as the whole test cycle overall with average emissions of 1.1x1012/kWh. For comparison, if the on-road PN limit applied under all driving conditions including the entire cold start period and based on raw emissions, >4nm emissions would exceed the current on road PM number limit of 9.8 x 1011/km by 10%. These results show that LNG trucks do emit large numbers of particles when all particles larger than 4nm emitted out of the tailpipe are measured. Overall, when emissions of all particles >4nm are considered, the LNG truck emits more particles than the diesel truck on both test cycles as well as during urban and rural operation, emitting between 0.3 to 15 times more particles depending on the driving conditions. The LNG truck only performed better than the A report by 44diesel truck under motorway driving conditions, however the reduction of -64% (regional test cycle) to -72% (ISC test cycle) is more modest compared to the reduction observed for >23 nanometer particles. Statements made by IVECO that its LNG trucks are better than diesel trucks in terms of particle pollution are false. The findings of this testing highlight that, in reality, the tested LNG truck is no better than the diesel truck in terms of particle pollution and, under many conditions, actually worse. The higher particle pollution from the LNG truck during urban driving also indicates that switching from LNG trucks to diesel trucks is not an effective strategy for reducing particle pollution in cities and urban areas. It also shows that the decision to delay the introduction of the on-road PM number emission limit by two years for gas trucks was misguided as it allows gas trucks to emit large amounts of particles under real-world driving conditions. 6.2 Nitrogen oxides Aside from particle emissions, internal combustion engine (ICE) trucks also emit a range of toxic gases, the most problematic of which are nitrogen oxides (NOx) as emissions from ICE vehicles are its biggest source in the EU.91 NOx emissions contain both nitrogen oxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2) gases. NO2 is the toxic component of NOx which causes a range of serious negative health effects including inflammation of the airways, reduced lung function and increased asthma attacks.92. However, as NO is readily converted to NO2 once released into the air, tailpipe emissions of both NO and NO2 are regulated at the tailpipe through a combined NOx emission limit. NO2 pollution is particularly a problem in urban areas where traffic levels are high and many cities in the EU still exceed the EU's Ambient Air Quality Directive legal limits for NO2 meaning that the air in many cities is unsafe to breathe due to toxic levels of NO2 pollution.93 In Europe's big cities, trucks contribute between 12 - 26% of the total NOx emissions.94 When it comes to NOx pollution from gas trucks, IVECO claims that the S-Way LNG truck can reduce emissions of NO2 by 90% compared to diesel, in effect attesting that LNG is better for air quality. To test these claims, FVT measured the emissions of both NOx and NO2. Firstly, IVECO's claim that NO2 pollution is reduced compared to diesel trucks is correct. The LNG truck emitted virtually no NO2 during any of the tests. However, focusing only on NO2 emissions is misleading because as described above, for air quality, it is not just the emissions of NO2 that matter. Instead, to cred-ibly assess the air quality impact of switching from diesel to LNG trucks, the amount of total NOx emissions including NO need be considered. The tests show that, while the LNG truck emitted less NOx than the diesel truck, the reduction was much smaller than expected following IVECO's claims. During the ISC test, the LNG truck emitted 76% less NOx than the diesel and 60% less during the regional test. The smallest reduction was measured during urban (-54 to -68%) and rural driving (-53 to -64%). A report by 45The magnitude of the reduction is largely down to the poor NOx emissions performance of the diesel truck which had very high cold start emissions particularly during the urban section of the ISC test. While no specific emission limit applies to cold start and urban driving, raw emissions during this period of the ISC test were almost three times higher than the road NOx emission limit of 690 mg/kWh. While the LNG truck emitted less than the diesel truck overall in both tests, it still had high urban emissions on the ISC test of 643 mg/kWh. This indicates that, while the LNG truck tested emitted less than the diesel truck, it still cannot be considered low emission due to high NOx emissions during urban driving. 7. Conclusions The tested LNG truck delivered much lower GHG savings than claimed by IVECO. Over a 100-year GWP, the LNG truck achieved a GHG reduction of 7.5% and 7.9% compared to the tested diesel truck. When looking at a 20-year GWP time frame, the LNG truck had higher emissions than the diesel truck, resulting in 13.4% and 13.6% higher GHGs respectively. A report by 46These findings run contrary to the industry's claims that gas-powered trucks constitute a viable 'bridge technology' which could deliver meaningful GHG reductions both in the short- and long-term. As the re-sults of this testing project highlight, betting on LNG trucks is counterproductive. The significantly higher global warming potential of methane over 20 years, compared to a 100-year timeframe, means that increasing the number of LNG trucks on European roads today would actually lead to an increase in global warming over the next few decades compared to what conventional diesel trucks would cause. The technology therefore represents nothing else than a 'dead end bridge'. The IPCC's most recent Sixth Assessment Report shows that, to have a likely chance to limit global warming to °C by the end of the century, GHG emissions need to start falling immediately from 2021 onwards.95 Neither sustainable biomethane nor synthetic methane produced from renewable electricity will be suffi-ciently scalable or affordable to be a viable solution for decarbonising trucking. Even with extremely high subsidies, up to six times the retail price of natural gas, the available biomethane feedstock in the six big-gest European countries would only meet 4% to 28% of the expected road freight energy consumption in 2050. It is therefore not credible to take into account any hypothetical GHG savings from renewable me-thane when quantifying the emissions performance of gas-powered trucks today or in the future. Continuing the investment in LNG trucks and infrastructure carries a high risk of stranded assets and, in the worst case, will create a fossil fuel lock-in due to the lack of renewable alternatives. As long as some vehicle manufacturers, hauliers and infrastructure operators continue to invest in this technology, they will have a vested interest to protect those investments. Since there will not be enough renewable me-thane available at competitive costs, even by 2050, the industry would instead need to rely on natural gas in order to meet increasing fuel demand from gas-powered trucks. Gas trucks are not a credible solution for reducing air pollutant emissions and improving air quality either. Contrary to IVECO's claims that the LNG truck can deliver large reductions in PM emissions, the testing results are showing that particle emissions from LNG trucks, both particle mass and particle number, can be higher than those from diesel trucks. The tested LNG truck emitted particularly large amounts of very small particles which are increasingly considered as the most harmful to human health. While overall NOx emissions were reduced compared to diesel, emissions during urban operation were close to the legal limits. This provides further evidence that gas-powered trucks are not a low-emission option and will not improve air quality in cities and urban areas, where pollution has the biggest adverse impact on human health. To really drive reductions in air pollution and help the EU achieve its zero pollu-tion targets for 2030, such as the reduction of premature deaths due to air pollution by at least 55%, a rapid shift away from diesel- and gas-powered trucks towards zero-emission technology is needed.96 A report by 478. Policy recommendations Betting on LNG trucks today, which emit even more GHGs than their diesel counterparts over a 20-year timeframe, could not be more contrary to these challenges. Spending time and money on a technology which can deliver little climate benefit and actually increases emissions over the coming decades is not compatible with the European Green Deal or the Paris Agreement. Instead, the EU and its Member States should end their harmful subsidies for gas trucks and focus exclusively on zero-emission technology. 8.1. EU level Alternative Fuels Infrastructure Regulation (AFIR) The EU should aim for an ambitious AFIR that focuses exclusively on electricity and renewable hydrogen, effectively removing gas refuelling (both CNG and LNG) from the scope and turning it into a Zero Emission Infrastructure Regulation (ZEIR).97 This will ensure that infrastructure investment in the EU is made ready for zero-emission vehicles. The definition of what qualifies as an 'alternative fuel' is important as it defines which fuels the EU consid-ers to be aligned with the European Green Deal. This definition is also at the heart of many European and national funding programmes, structural and investment funds. Therefore, as long as natural gas is part of the scope of the alternative fuel infrastructure law, it benefits from preferential treatment and funding. For example, support from the CEF Transport Blending Facility, the main tool to finance alternative fuels infra-structure and vehicles, is based on this definition of what counts as an alternative fuel. Energy Taxation Directive (ETD) Many Member States still give tax breaks to natural gas used in transport despite the lack of environmental benefits.98 It is welcomed that, as part of the revision of the ETD, the European Commission has proposed to remove the possibility of tax exemptions or reductions to natural gas used as a transport fuel.99 The proposed minimum excise duty rate for both natural gas and non-sustainable biogas should be set at the same level as petrol and diesel right from the start of the transitional period. EURO VII emission standards ICE trucks will likely continue to be sold until at least the 2030s. In order to reduce their negative impact on air quality, health and the environment it is crucial that all ICE trucks sold until the full transition to ZEVs are as low-emission as technically feasible. Since the EURO VI emission limits for HDVs was agreed upon in 2009, new and better emission control technology such as cylinder deactivation and dual dosing selective catalytic reduction (SCR) systems have been developed. Lower emission limits than the current EURO VI standard are already feasible, including for NOx, as demonstrated by much lower truck emission limits set into law in California. A report by 48At the end of 2021, the European Commission is set to put forward a proposal for a EURO VII Regulation in order to ensure that air pollutants from ICE trucks are reduced to the lowest levels technically possible. As a priority, the upcoming proposal should include: ● A reduction of the emission limits for all regulated pollutants to the lowest levels that are techni-cally feasible. This should include a reduction of the PM number emissions limit to levels which require the fitting of particle filters to gas-powered trucks. A reduction in the methane (CH4) emis-sions limit for all trucks is also needed. ● The Introduction of limits for all pollutants that are harmful to health or the environment and can be effectively regulated at the tailpipe. This should include limits for currently unregulated pollu-tants such as smaller than 23nm particles and the potent greenhouse gas nitrous oxide (N2O). ● Emission tests which fully cover all driving conditions including cold start (when the engine is first started) and low-speed, low-load urban driving to ensure that emission limits are respected under all possible driving conditions. ● An increase in the durability requirements to ensure that trucks have to meet the emission limits throughout their lifetime. As a minimum, this should increase the current emission durability re-quirement to 1.3 million kilometres, a standard already set for trucks in the U.S. ● Euro VII must include robust provisions to prevent tampering with emission critical systems. Tam-pering of emission critical systems such as AdBlue dosing for Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR) is a big problem for ICE trucks in the EU and results in high NOx emissions on the road. CO2 standards Neither diesel or gas trucks are a solution for decarbonising trucking or improving air quality. This will re-quire a rapid increase in the supply of zero-emission trucks beyond what truck manufacturers will have to deliver under the current European CO2 standards for new HDVs. The review of the CO2 standards, which is foreseen for 2022, needs to ensure at least 50% zero-emission truck sales by 2030. This is in line with recent public announcements by European truck manufacturers, which already aim for ZEV sales shares between 40% and 50% by the same date.100 The EU should also adopt a sales phase-out for ICE trucks, taking duly into account different vehicle characteristics, duty cy-cles and operational needs. The sale of ICE trucks should end by 2035 for the vast majority of vehicle groups. A report by 498.2. National level Germany Road charge exemption Germany must end the current road charge exemption for gas trucks immediately to not further violate EU law. Until the planned CO2 variation of the infrastructure charge enters into force, EURO VI gas trucks must be tolled at the same level as EURO VI diesel trucks to comply with the previous and new Eurovignette Directive. From 2023 and according to the new Directive, Germany will have to vary the infrastructure charge for those truck categories which are regulated under the CO2 standards for new HDVs. For this, ICE trucks as well as ZLEVs will be allocated to five CO2 emission classes based on their performance against their linear emission reduction trajectory as defined in the CO2 standards. Under the CO2 variation and only from 2023 onwards, gas trucks will be eligible for a reduction on the in-frastructure charge between 5% and 30% depending on whether their engine technology qualifies them for CO2 emission class 2 or 3. Fleet renewal programme In Germany, gas-powered trucks will continue to be eligible under the new fleet renewal programme which incentivises the purchase of new EURO VI trucks with up to € 15,000 if a vehicle belonging to an older emis-sion class is scrapped.101 The funding scheme should be amended and the eligibility of gas trucks removed. Fuel taxation Germany is currently applying a very low fuel duty rate to natural gas used as a transport fuel (€ 13.90/MWh) regardless whether it is fossil-derived or sustainable biomethane.102 The current tax rate will be increased in gradual steps until the original rate of € 31.80/MWh applies from 2027. Germany should adjust the reduced rate so that it only applies to sustainable biomethane which is sourced from advanced waste- and residue-based feedstocks. Fossil-derived natural gas should not benefit from any reduction and be taxed at the normal rate instead. United Kingdom Fuel taxation The UK is applying a very low fuel duty rate to natural gas used in transport (£-pence 24.70/kg), regardless whether it is fossil-derived or biomethane.103 The Treasury should adjust the reduced rate so this only ap-plies to certified biomethane which is sourced from advanced waste- and residue-based feedstocks and which qualifies for the Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation (RTFO). Natural gas should be taxed on an energy content basis at the same level as diesel. Biomethane can play a niche role in decarbonising freight but is very unlikely to be able to scale sustainably to play any major role. A report by 50France Special depreciation scheme The special depreciation system in France for zero-emission trucks and those running on natural gas or biomethane was recently prolonged until Under this scheme, vehicle owners can depreciate a total of 160% (up to 16 tonnes GVW) or 140% (above 16 tonnes GVW) from the purchase value if the truck is powered exclusively by fossil-derived natural gas, biomethane, liquid biofuels, electricity or hydrogen.105 This purchase funding scheme and future ones need to be limited to ZEVs and exclude any combustion-powered trucks including those running on natural gas. The same goes for currently existing regional fund-ing schemes for purchasing commercial gas vehicles.106 French cities and regions should end such schemes as soon as possible. Fuel taxation France is also applying a very low fuel duty rate to natural gas used as a transport fuel (€ 5.23/MWh). The full tax rate for natural gas for household consumption amounts to € 8.43/MWh.107 As a minimum, at least the full rate should also be applied to natural gas as a transport fuel. Biomethane is currently exempt from the consumption tax on natural gas irrespective of its feedstock origin and GHG emissions savings poten-tial. This exemption should cease to apply unless it is certified biomethane produced from advanced wastes and residues. Italy Purchase subsidy Italy offers purchase incentives for new low- and zero-emission as well as gas-powered trucks exceeding 7 tonnes GVW of up to € 20,000.108 This purchase subsidy should be limited to ZEVs and not apply to gas trucks. Fuel taxation Italy applies an extremely low fuel duty rate to natural gas used as a transport fuel amounting to € 0.09/GJ.109 This rate should be at least increased to the minimum excise duty rate of € 2.60/GJ as laid out in the ETD. Spain Fuel taxation Spain also applies a very low fuel duty rate to natural gas used in transport of € 1.15/GJ.110 This rate should be at least increased to the minimum excise duty rate of € 2.60/GJ as laid out in the ETD. Poland Fuel taxation Poland fully exempts natural gas used in transport from fuel duty.111 Given the lack of environmental ben-efits, the fuel duty should be at least increased to the minimum excise duty rate as laid out in the ETD. A report by 51Annex Tailpipe carbon dioxide emissions ISC test Regional test Diesel SI LNG Diesel SI LNG Tailpipe gCO2/km 1,,100.2 Savings SI LNG vs. Diesel - 11.9% % Tailpipe methane emissions ISC test Regional test Diesel SI LNG Diesel SI LNG Tailpipe gCH4/km < < In gCO2e/km 20-year GWP -year GWP 0.001 As a share of tailpipe CO2 20-year GWP < 0.1% 1.4% < 0.1% 100-year GWP < 0.1% 0.5% < 0.1% % 0.9% Tailpipe nitrous oxide emissions ISC test Regional test Diesel SI LNG Diesel SI LNG Tailpipe gN2O/km In gCO2e/km 20-year GWP A report by -year GWP As a share of tailpipe CO2 20-year GWP 4.1% 0.2% 100-year GWP 4.1% 0.2% % 7.4% 4.0 0.4% 0.4% Non-tailpipe methane emissions ISC test Regional test Diesel SI LNG Diesel SI LNG Non-tailpipe gCH4/km In gCO2e/km 20-year GWP As a share of tailpipe CO2 100-year GWP 20-year GWP 100-year GWP - - - - - % 4.8% - - - - - % 4.8% Tank-to-wheel GHG emissions ISC test Regional test Diesel SI LNG Diesel SI LNG Tank-to-wheel gCO2e/km 20-year GWP 1,094.3 1,071.7 1,181.2 1,-year GWP 1,,181.5 1,043.2 Savings SI LNG vs. Diesel 20-year GWP 100-year GWP - 2.1% - 10.9% - 2.3% - 11.7% A report by 53Well-to-tank GHG emissions ISC test Regional test Diesel SI LNG Diesel SI LNG Well-to-tank gCO2e/km As a share of tailpipe CO2 20-year GWP -year GWP -year GWP 27.7% 53.9% 100-year GWP 25.6% 30.9% % 25.8% % 31.2% Well-to-wheel GHG emissions ISC test Regional test Diesel SI LNG Diesel SI LNG Well-to-wheel gCO2e/km 20-year GWP 1,384.9 1,570.6 1,488.2 1,-year GWP 1,363.3 1,261.0 1,465.0 1,349.8 Savings SI LNG vs. Diesel 20-year GWP 100-year GWP + 13.4% - 7.5% + 13.6% - 7.9% A report by 54References 1 European Union (2019). Regulation (EU) 2019/1242 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 June 2019 setting CO2 emission performance standards for new heavy-duty vehicles. Retrieved form 2 European Commission (2019). Communication from the Commission. The European Green Deal. Retrieved from 3 European Union (2020). Regulation (EC) No 595/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2009 on type-approval of motor vehicles and engines with respect to emissions from heavy duty vehicles (Euro VI). Retrieved from 4 IVECO (2020). IVECO presents its vision for natural gas and alternative traction in transport at the 8th Gasnam Congress. Retrieved from 5 Scania (no date). Alternative Energy. Finding the Right Solution. Retrieved from 6 Volvo Trucks (no date). The gas-powered Volvo FH LNG for long haul. Retrieved from 7 NGVA Europe (2018). Greenhouse Gas Intensity of Natural Gas. Final Report. Retrieved from 8 Volvo (2020). Volvo Trucks sees increased interest in gas as an alternative to diesel for heavy-duty truck oper-ations in Europe. Retrieved from 9 NGVA Europe (2020). The (necessary) rise of LNG. Retrieved from 10 NGVA Europe (no date). Policy Priorities. Renewable Gas. Retrieved from 11 IVECO (no date). Natural Power. The Natural Alternative to Diesel. Retrieved from 12 IVECO (no date). IVECO S-WAY e-Brochure. Retrieved from 13 NGVA Europe (no date). Air quality. Retrieved from 14 Zukunft Gas (no date). LNG – Flüssiges Erdgas für lange Strecken. Retrieved from 15 Prussi et al. (2020). JEC Well-to-Tank report v5. Retrieved from 16 Daimler (2019). Daimler Trucks & Buses targets completely CO2-neutral fleet of new vehicles by 2039 in key regions. Retrieved from 17 MAN (2020). MAN presents Zero-Emission Roadmap. Retrieved from 18 DAF (no date). Sustainability. On the road to even cleaner road transport. Retrieved from 19 Eurostat (2021). New registrations of lorries and road tractors, by type of motor energy (road_eqr_lormot and road_eqr_tracmot). Retrieved from 20 ACEA (2021). Fuel types of new trucks: diesel 96.5%, electric 0.4%, alternative fuels 2.9% market share in 2020. Retrieved from A report by 5521 NGVA Europe (2019). NGVA Europe marks the 200th European LNG fuelling station with a revamp of its sta-tions map. Retrieved from 22 NGVA Europe (no date). Stations map. Retrieved from 23 Adolf et al. (2019). Shell LNG study. Liquefied natural gas - new energy for ships and trucks? Retrieved from 24 S&P Global Platts (2021). European LNG import capacity: opportunity and risk. Retrieved from 25 Prussi et al. Retrieved from 26 Gas Infrastructure Europe and European Biogas Association (2020). European Biomethane Map. Infrastruc-ture for Biomethane Production. Retrieved from 27 Nordsol (2020). The first Dutch bio-LNG installation: Construction has started. Retrieved from 28 Shell (2020). CO₂-neutraler Kraftstoff für den Schwerlastverkehr: Shell plant Gas-Verflüssiger im Rheinland. Retrieved from 29 Mottschall et al. Decarbonization of on-road freight transport and the role of LNG from a German perspec-tive. Retrieved from 30 U.S. Department of Energy (no date). Alternative Fuels Data Center. Natural gas vehicles. Retrieved from 31 Volvo Trucks (no date). The New Gas-Powered Volvo FH LNG. Retrieved from 32 Bünger et al. (2016). Vergleich von CNG und LNG zum Einsatz in LKW im Fernverkehr. Retrieved from 33 Kühnel et al. (2018). Oberleitungs-Lkw im Kontext weiterer Antriebs- und Energieversorgungsoptionen für den Straßengüterfernverkehr. Ein Technologie- und Wirtschaftsvergleich. Retrieved from 34 European Union (2020). Regulation (EU) 2018/956 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 June 2018 on the monitoring and reporting of CO2 emissions from and fuel consumption of new heavy-duty vehi-cles. Retrieved from 35 European Union (2020). Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 of 12 December 2017 implementing Regula-tion (EC) No 595/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the determination of the CO2 emissions and fuel consumption of heavy-duty vehicles. Retrieved from 36 European Environmental Agency (2021). Monitoring of CO2 emissions from heavy-duty vehicles. Retrieved from 37 Ragon et al. The EU heavy-duty CO2 standards: Impact of the COVID-19 crisis and market dynamics on baseline emissions. Retrieved from 38 Meszler et al. European heavy-duty vehicles: Cost-effectiveness of fuel-efficiency technologies for long-haul tractor-trailers in the timeframe. Retrieved from 39 Consortium for ultra Low Vehicle Emissions (2021). Scenarios for HDVs. Summary Emission Limits and Test Conditions. Retrieved from A report by 5640 IPCC (2013). Climate Change 2013. The Physical Science Basis. Working Group I Contribution to the Fifth As-sessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Retrieved from 41 Mottschall et al. Decarbonization of on-road freight transport and the role of LNG from a German per-spective. Retrieved from 42 TNO (2018). Emissions testing of two Euro VI LNG heavy-duty vehicles in the Netherlands: Tank-to-wheel emissions. Retrieved from 43 NGVA Europe (no date). Gas as a transport fuel. Retrieved from 44 Agility fuel solutions (2017). Field Service Bulletin Depressurize or Defuel? Safely Working on LNG Fuel Sys-tems. Retrieved from 45 Mottschall et al. Retrieved from 46 Prussi et al. Retrieved from 47 European Commission (2021). Quarterly Report Energy on European Gas Markets with focus on the impact of global LNG markets on EU gas imports. Retrieved from 48 IPCC (2007). Climate Change 2007. Working Group I Contribution to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Retrieved from 49 European Union (2020). Retrieved from 50 European Committee for Standardization (2017). Natural gas and biomethane for use in transport and bio-methane for injection in the natural gas network - Part 2: Automotive fuels specification. Retrieved from 51 Searle et al. Gas definitions for the European Union. Retrieved from 52 Searle et al. What is the role for renewable methane in European decarbonization? Retrieved from 53 Country-specific data for the feedstock potential and respective production costs was obtained directly from the authors of the study. 54 Transport & Environment (2021). How to decarbonise long-haul trucking in Germany. Retrieved from 55 Transport & Environment (2020). How to decarbonise the UK's freight sector by 2050. Retrieved from 56 Transport & Environment (2020). How to decarbonise the French freight sector by 2050. Retrieved from 57 Cambridge Econometrics (forthcoming). 58 CNG Europe (no date). Average prices in Europe by country. Retrieved from 59 Zoll (no date). Quotenverpflichtung. Erfüllung der Quotenverpflichtung. Anrechnung von Biokraftstoffen. Retrieved from A report by 5760 Prussi et al. (2021). Biomethane as alternative fuel for the EU road sector: analysis of existing and planned infrastructure. Energy Strategy Reviews Volume 33. Retrieved from 61 Gazzetta Ufficiale (2018). Decreto 2 marzo 2018. Promozione dell'uso del biometano e degli altri biocarburanti avanzati nel settore dei trasporti. (18A01821) (GU Serie Generale n.65 del ). Retrieved from 62 Department for Transport (2021). Guidance. Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation. Retrieved from 63 Agora Verkehrswende et al. PtG/PtL calculator. Retrieved from 64 Zoll (2020). Befristete abweichende Steuersätze für Erdgase und Flüssiggase als Kraftstoff. Retrieved from 65 Pfennig et al. PtX-Atlas: Weltweite Potenziale für die Erzeugung von grünem Wasserstoff und klimaneutralen synthetischen Kraft- und Brennstoffen. Teilbericht im Rahmen des Projektes: DeV-KopSys. Retrieved from and 66 Ueckerdt et al. Potential and risks of hydrogen-based e-fuels in climate change mitigation. Nature Climate Change volume 11. Retrieved from 67 Rolande (2021). The Price of LNG and CNG+. Retrieved from 68 Pfennig et al. (2017). Mittel- und langfristige Potenziale von PtL- und H2-Importen aus internationalen EE-Vorzugsregionen. Retrieved from 69 NGVA Europe (no date). Benefits of gas in transport. Retrieved from 70 European Environmental Agency (2020). Air quality in Europe — 2020 report. Retrieved from 71 Younan et al. Particulate matter and episodic memory decline mediated by early neuroanatomic bi-omarkers of Alzheimer's disease. Brain, 143(1). Retrieved from 72 World Health Organization (2019). Ambient (outdoor) air pollution. Retrieved from 73 European Environmental Agency (2020). Retrieved from 74 IVECO (no date). NEW NP. Retrieved from 75 Napolitano et al. Particle and Gaseous Emissions from a Heavy-Duty SI Gas Engine over WHTC Driving Cycles. SAE Int. J. Adv. & Curr. Prac. in Mobility, 2(1). Retrieved from 76 Transport & Environment (2020). Compressed natural gas vehicles are not a clean solution for transport. Re-view of the latest evidence shows high levels of particle emissions. Retrieved from 77 IVECO (2020). IVECO S-Way NP 460 wins Sustainable Truck of the Year 2021 Award. Retrieved from A report by 5878 Möller et al. (2008). Deposition, retention, and translocation of ultrafine particles from the central airways and lung periphery. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 177(4). Retrieved from 79 Oberdorster et al. (2004). Translocation of inhaled ultrafine particles to the brain. Inhal Toxicol. 16(6-7). Re-trieved from 80 Bové et al. Ambient black carbon particles reach the fetal side of human placenta. Nature Communi-cations volume 10, Article number: 3866. Retrieved from 81 Devlin et al. (2014). Controlled exposure of humans with metabolic syndrome to concentrated ultrafine am-bient particulate matter causes cardiovascular effects. Toxicol Sci. 140(1). Retrieved from 82 Downward et al. Long-Term Exposure to Ultrafine Particles and Incidence of Cardiovascular and Cer-ebrovascular Disease in a Prospective Study of a Dutch Cohort. Environ Health Perspect. 126(12). Retrieved from 83 Weichenthal et al. Within-city Spatial Variations in Ambient Ultrafine Particle Concentrations and In-cident Brain Tumors in Adults. Epidemiology. 2020 Mar; 31(2). Retrieved from 84 King's College London (2019). Differentiated health impacts of primary and secondary ultrafine particles. Funded under H2020-EU.1.3.2. Retrieved from 85 Frampton (2001). Systemic and cardiovascular effects of airway injury and inflammation: ultrafine particle exposure in humans. 109(Suppl 4). Retrieved from 86 ACEA. (2019) Comments to the European Commission proposal for amending Regulation (EU) No 582/ European Union (2019). Commission Regulation (EU) 2019/1939 as regards Auxiliary Emission Strategies (AES), access to vehicle OBD information and vehicle repair and maintenance information, measurement of emissions during cold engine start periods and use of portable emissions measurement systems (PEMS) to measure particle numbers, with respect to heavy duty vehicles. Retrieved from 88 Giechaskiel, B., Et.al.. (2017) Solid Particle Number Emission Factors of Euro VI Heavy-Duty Vehicles on the Road and in the Laboratory. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. Retrieved from 89 DownToTen. (2020) Measuring automotive exhaust particles down to 10 nanometers. Retrieved from 90 Darquenne. (2012) Aerosol Deposition in Health and Disease. Retrieved from 91 European Environmental Agency (2020). Retrieved from 92 Accessed 15/06/2021 93 European Environmental Agency (2021). Exceedance of air quality standards in Europe. Retrieved from 94 Air Quality Consultants (2021). Covid-19, Air Quality and Mobility Policies: Six European Cities. Retrieved from 95 IPCC (2021). Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Re-trieved from 96 European Union (2021). Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, The European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. Pathway to a Healthy Planet for All EU Action Plan: 'Towards Zero Pollution for Air, Water and Soil'. Retrieved from A report by 5997 European Union (2021). Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the de-ployment of alternative fuels infrastructure. Retrieved from 98 European Commission (2020). Excise Duty Tables. Part II Energy products and Electricity. Retrieved from 99 European Union (2021). Proposal for a Council Directive restructuring the Union framework for the taxation of energy products and electricity. Retrieved from 100 T&E calculations based on public announcements from truck manufacturers. 101 Bundesamt für Güterverkehr (2021). Flottenerneuerung. Retrieved from 102 Zoll (2020). Retrieved from 103 Gov.uk (no date). Fuel Duty. Retrieved from 104 Legifrance (2021). LOI n° du 22 août 2021 portant lutte contre le dérèglement climatique et ren-forcement de la résilience face à ses effets (1). Retrieved from 105 Legifrance (2021). Code général des impôts. 2: Détermination des bénéfices imposables (Articles 36 à 43 bis). Re-trieved from 106 Gaz-mobilite.fr (no date). Véhicules GNV: aides à l'achat locales et régionales en France. Retrieved from 107 Ministère de la Transition Écologique (2021). Fiscalité des énergies. Retrieved from 108 Gazzetta Ufficiale (2020). Ministero delle infrastrutture e dei trasporti. DECRETO 12 maggio 2020. Modalita' di erogazione degli incentivi a favore degli investimenti nel settore dell'autotrasporto. Retrieved from 109 Gazzetta Ufficiale (2020). Decreto-Legge 6 dicembre 2011, n. 201. Disposizioni urgenti per la crescita, l'equita' e il consolidamento dei conti pubblici. Retrieved from 110 Agencia Estatal Boletín Oficial del Estado (2021). Impuestos especiales. Retrieved from 111 Kancelaria Sejmu (2021). Ustawa o podatku akcyzowym. Retrieved from A report by 60
