---
id: 98aeef64-5acf-5488-8656-d54631252092
title: "Ready or not: Who are the frontrunners in the global race to clean up trucks?"
date: 2023-06-19T01:00:00
office: Brussels
publication_type: Report
article_url: https://www.transportenvironment.org/articles/ready-or-not-who-are-the-frontrunners-in-the-global-race-to-clean-up-trucks
pdf_url: https://www.transportenvironment.org/uploads/files/230619_TE_Resumen_informe_fabricantes_de_camiones-1.pdf
doc_ids: [98aeef64-5acf-5488-8656-d54631252092]
---

# Ready or not: Who are the frontrunners in the global race to clean up trucks?

> T&E ranks truckmakers' readiness to transition fully to zero-emission truck sales.

Ready or notWho are the frontrunners in the global race to cleanup trucks and gain technology leadership?June 2023A study byTransport & EnvironmentPublished: June 2023. The report was amended on June 27th, 2023 to include missing information at thetime of publication.Author: Max MollièreExpert group: Sofie Defour, Fedor Unterlohner, James Nix, Simon SuzanEditeur responsable: William Todts, Executive Director. (2023). Ready or Not: Who are the frontrunners in the global race to clean uptrucks and gain technology leadership?. The authors are grateful for the external review from Eamonn Mulholland from the InternationalCouncil on Clean Transportation, Ben Scott from Carbon Tracker, and Ricardo Garcia Coyne fromCALSTART.This report is not meant as financial advice.A study by2Executive SummaryT&E ranked European truckmakers' readiness to transition fully to zero-emission truck sales. Thisreport assesses the compatibility of their voluntary zero-emission sales announcements with climateneeds, and the extent to which they are aligning their industrial plans and business activity with thosetargets. This helps identify the gap between announcement and plans, and the role for regulation toensure a speedy transition. The report also looks into how European manufacturers performcompared to their counterparts in the US and China, assessing who is best positioned to win theongoing global race for leadership on commercial vehicle technology.Scania, Mercedes-Benz Trucks, and MAN in the leadScania, Mercedes-Benz Trucks, and MAN are the three European frontrunners based on theirannounced ambition and strategy. All three aim for 100% new zero-emission truck (ZET) sales by 2040or earlier. Volvo Trucks is the current market leader in battery-electric truck sales in Europe and themanufacturer with the most ambitious 2030 target (70% ZET sales share). But the company is notcommitted to only truly zero-emission technologies in the long term. Renault Trucks and IVECO Groupare lagging behind in the transition. DAF closes the ranks with a very weak score, having no public ZETtarget for 2030, and scoring the lowest of all legacy manufacturers on battery value chain. Strong CO2standards for trucks are needed to ensure frontrunners keep their promises and laggards catch up.Figure E1. Zero-emission readiness scores of legacy European truckmakersTesla and BYD outcompete most European truckmakersWhen comparing readiness on a global scale, European manufacturers only have five representativesin the top ten. Both the US and China have champions in Tesla and BYD, the latter already sellingtrucks in all three regions. These new entrants on the truck market could pose a threat to established11 EDIT 27 June 2023: The score of Volta Trucks was corrected to account for information missing at the time of firstpublication.A study by3truckmakers in coming years. Both Tesla and BYD have experience in rapidly scaling up zero-emissionmanufacturing in the cars segment. They have built strong battery supply chains, including securingraw materials.Figure 2. Zero-emission readiness scores of the top ten truckmakers2Compared to legacy US and Chinese truckmakers, European manufacturers appear to be betterprepared to go to zero-emission, partly because forthcoming stronger heavy-duty vehicles (HDV) CO2standards have incentivised EU manufacturers to announce voluntary zero-emission sales targets for2030 and 2040. However, voluntary commitments can be missed or changed, and we identified a gapwith some of these manufacturers' industrial strategy. What matters is how fast the EU market willhave to decarbonise compared to others, as regulations drive truckmakers to develop robustinvestment plans.Looking ahead, the recently adopted Californian regulation to sell only zero-emission vehicles from2036 is expected to spur major US truckmakers to decarbonise faster. With most EU OEM groups alsoactive in other markets, this could potentially refocus group level investments from the EU to the US.Combined with the support for battery supply chains from the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA), thelegacy US truck brands could quickly catch up and outpace European brands.Stronger action needed to secure battery supplyTesla, BYD, and TRATON's Scania and MAN are the only truckmakers to have secured long-termsupplies of battery raw materials, which they did primarily to secure their car market segment.Truckmakers who are less connected to carmakers have to build their own battery value chains (eitherin-sourcing or through partnerships), and risk being too late to secure raw materials. Unless European2 EDIT 27 June 2023: The score of Volta Trucks was corrected to account for information missing at the time of firstpublication.A study by4truckmakers are part of comprehensive battery ecosystems, their leadership risks being challenged inthe coming years. Ambitious HDV CO2 standards are needed to create a signal for the battery industryto invest in Europe.As China currently leads the battery market, it is unlikely that Chinese manufacturers will have troublesourcing batteries. Meanwhile, the IRA will boost investments in battery manufacturing in the US.Already, two-thirds of battery capacity planned in Europe is potentially at risk if strong industrialpolicy and funding is not put in place to secure the plans. Without strong signal and oake fromEuropean truckmakers, parent companies with both European and US subsidiaries could prioritisedeveloping battery supply chains in the US, where e-truck regulations are currently stronger.Figure E3. Share of global battery cell production by regionHow Europe can win the raceEurope can use the HDV CO2 emission standards to ensure European truckmakers remain in the lead.This legislation is currently under review. But the new targets proposed by the European Commissionare unlikely to deliver the needed push for frontrunners Scania, Mercedes-Benz Trucks, and MAN toremain ahead of the pack; for laggards IVECO and DAF to catch-up; and for newcomers Tesla and BYDnot to outcompete those laggards. Instead lawmakers should:● Set a CO2 reduction target of -65% in 2030, in line with what leading manufacturers havealready announced.● Set a CO2 reduction target of -100% in 2035. California has already adopted a 100% salestarget for HDVs from 2036. The US as a whole has signed the Global Memorandum ofUnderstanding, committing to 100% ZET sales by 2040. Without a similar 100% target, the EUrisks falling behind as major truckmakers could shi investments away from Europe.● Extend the scope of the regulation to small trucks and vocational and non-certified vehicles,so that all new trucks are regulated. California's zero-emission mandate covers all truckswithout exemption, proving all truck categories can decarbonise.● Keep fuels out of the CO2 standards: biofuels and e-fuels are expensive and false climatesolutions to decarbonise new trucks. Truckmakers opposed to including fuels in the regulationmake up over 90% of the market, with only laggards in favour of such a scheme.A study by5Figure E4. Market share in 2020 of EU truckmakers, and their position on including fuels in the CO2standardsA study by6Table of contents1. The global race for zero-emission trucking2. Measuring readiness2.1. Zero-emission truck ambition: /40 points2.2. Penalties for non–zero-emission technologies: /-13 points2.2.1. Fossil gas trucks2.2.2. Biofuels2.2.3. e-fuels2.2.4. Supporting the introduction of fuels in the EU HDV CO2 standards2.3. Developing e-optimised trucks: /22 points2.4. Investing in the e-mobility value chain: /20 points2.5. Charging and hydrogen refuelling strategy: /12 points2.6. ZET financing: /6 points3. How ready are European truckmakers?3.1. Results for legacy European truckmakers3.2. Comparison to North American and Chinese truckmakers3.2.1. United States & Canada3.2.2. China3.2.3. European zero-emission truckmakers4. Conclusion and lessons for future competitiveness4.1. Legacy truckmakers4.2. New entrants4.3. Battery supply chains5. Policy recommendationsBibliographyAnnex 1. Market coverage of selected truckmakersAnnex 2. MethodologyAnnex 3. Summary of results for European OEMsA study by71. The global race for zero-emission truckingRapid and deep reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are needed to limit global warming to1.5°C. Transportation is the second largest source of GHG emissions in the European Union, causing 25%of EU GHG emissions in 2019 [1]. Trucks and buses account for 6% of all GHG emissions in the EU [1]. Inthe United States, heavy-duty vehicles (HDV) cause 7% of total US emissions [2].3To decarbonise the sector, the European Commission unveiled in February 2023 its proposal to revise theHDV CO2 standards, which would set tailpipe CO2 reduction targets for new vehicle sales of -45% in 2030,-65% in 2035, and -90% in 2040.Across the pond, the US Environmental Protection Agency released a proposal for Phase 3 of its GHGEmissions Standards for HDVs. The state of California already recently set a 100% ZET sales target forHDVs from 2036. Its vehicle regulations are typically adopted by other states which make up 35% of theUS market [3]. The United States also adopted the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) in August 2022, which willsupercharge the uptake of zero-emission trucks (ZETs) by providing financial incentives until 2032.While the ZET market is still in its infancy in Europe and North America, China has rapidly ramped up itsZET market in the last decade, and accounted for 90% of global ZET registrations in 2022 (compared to2% for the US and 7% for the EU+EFTA+UK) [4]. Subsidies were a major driver of the ZET uptake in China,and sales of electric trucks declined as subsidies were gradually phased down [5]. China now plans tostrengthen its HDV fuel consumption standards, proposing to increase their stringency by 15% by 2025compared to 2020 [6].Apart from regulatory action, European original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) have announcedvoluntary targets to decarbonise their sales. This report assesses the compatibility of their voluntaryannouncements with climate needs, and the extent to which these OEMs are aligning their industrialplans and business activity with those targets.The analysis is based on publicly available information. All major European OEMs have been given theopportunity to respond to the information included here and indicate any potential misinterpretations onT&E's part. Feedback from OEMs and reviewers was incorporated in the report where applicable.The readiness of European OEMs to go to zero-emission is compared to international competitors andzero-emission truckmakers. (Annex 1 details the criteria for inclusion within the scope.) The aim is toidentify ambition and implementation gaps, and draw lessons to ensure the road freight sector is set on acredible path to zero-emission by 2050. Buses are out of the scope of this report.3 When including international bunkers used for aviation and shipping in transport emissions, transportation is thelargest source of GHG emissions in the EU (33% in 2019).A study by82. Measuring readinessThis section presents a broad overview of the zero-emission (ZE) readiness index, based on the electricvehicle readiness index previously developed by T&E for cars [7]. The two main index categories are ZEambition and industrial strategy.Zero-emission ambition is scored out of 40 points, and looks at the voluntary ZET targets OEMs havecommunicated for 2030 and 2040. Public commitments are important as they show policymakers what isfeasible, as well as bring investment certainty for other economic actors (e.g. infrastructure providers orbattery manufacturers). The ambition section also includes penalties for pursuing technologies which areincompatible with climate objectives, such as fossil gas, biofuels, and e-fuels in new trucks. Plans to usethese fuels in the legacy fleet were not taken into account.Industrial strategy is scored out of 60 points, and comprises ZET model line-up (22 points), securing ZEmobility value chains (20 points), energy strategy (12 points), and financing strategy (6 points).Scores for all truckmakers,accompanying this report.including data sources, are available in the supplementary materials2.1. Zero-emission truck ambition: /40 pointsBeing ready for zero-emission requires setting clear targets in line with climate needs. Achieving climateneutrality by 2050 requires the last polluting trucks to be sold by 2035 at the latest, as European trucksremain in the fleet for 20 years on average [8].T&E recommends setting emission reduction targets for the HDV CO2 standards of -65% in 2030 and-100% in 2035. This translates into ZE targets for new sales of 60% in 2030 and 100% in 2035 respectively.4However, OEMs have not announced targets for 2035, so their ambition is assessed on the basis of their2040 announcements instead. As a result, the ZET sales shares required to score full points in thiscategory are 60% in 2030 and 100% in 2040.Voluntary announcements oen use unclear language. For example,the European AutomobileManufacturers' Association (ACEA) and its members have released a statement aiming for all new trucksto be "fossil-free" by 2040 [9]. Where targets are not explicitly limited to truly zero-emission technologies(i.e. battery-electric, fuel cell hydrogen or hydrogen combustion),it is assumed that 80% of theannounced target refers to ZET sales and 20% to sales of conventional trucks running on low-carbonfuels.4 Engine efficiency is assumed to improve by 0.5%–1.3% annually depending on the truck category. As a result, a-65% CO2 target translates into a ZE target for new sales of 58% to 63%. This is rounded to 60% for simplicity.A study by92.2. Penalties for non–zero-emission technologies: /-13 pointsGas, biofuels, or e-fuels are oen falsely touted as climate solutions to decarbonise new trucks, in spite ofthe environmental harm they commonly cause (CO2 emissions, methane leakage, biodiversity loss, airand noise pollution, etc.) or their scarce availability while other sectors lack alternatives to decarbonise.In addition, truckmakers have no control over how their trucks will be refuelled over their lifetime, sothey cannot guarantee the emissions savings they claim. Relying on bio and e-fuels to decarbonise trucksshis the responsibility for and the costs of the transition onto fuel suppliers and fleet operators, whileletting OEMs off the hook.Promoting or investing in false solutions also syphons investments away from truly zero-emissiontechnologies. As a result, OEMs receive a penalty for each non–zero-emission technology they support.2.2.1. Fossil gas trucksApart from CO2 and nitrous oxides, gas trucks also emit small amounts of methane. Methane slip can beparticularly high during cold starts [10]. Though it does not accumulate in the atmosphere, methane is afar more potent greenhouse gas than CO2, with a global warming potential 28 times superior to that ofCO2 over 100 years [11]. Increasing methane emissions could have devastating climate impacts and wouldincrease the probability of breaching tipping points [12]. Gas cannot be a transitional technology as itincreases near-term warming instead of relieving it.5Russia's invasion of Ukraine also highlighted Europe's high dependence on Russian gas. Prior to the war,the EU imported more than 40% of its fossil gas from Russia [13]. Energy prices surged in 2022, which ledto a drop in demand [14]. Registrations of alternatively-fuelled trucks fell by 20% in the EU. In Germany,they collapsed by 34% [15].6Therefore, truckmakers investing in gas trucks as a long-term strategy receive a penalty of three points.2.2.2. BiofuelsGrowing crops to produce biofuels causes biodiversity loss, increased GHG emissions from deforestation,and threatens food security [16][17]. Producing advanced biofuels from waste and residue feedstocks hasthe potential to bring emission savings, provided that stringent sustainability criteria are met. However,only very small quantities of advanced biofuels can be produced when strong sustainability criteria areapplied. Biomass with existing use must be excluded, as otherwise industries which already use it may be5 Real-world emission savings of fossil gas trucks are negligible compared to diesel when considering the 100-yearglobal warming potential (GWP) of methane — only a 7.5% reduction in well-to-wheel (WTW) GHG emissions. Worsestill, gas trucks' GHG emissions can be 13.4% higher than diesel trucks' when considering methane's 20-year GWP[10].6 Natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas, biofuels, ethanolA study by10forced to revert back to food and feed stock, leading to the negative climate and environmental impactsmentioned above.Yet the industry oen touts Hydrotreated Vegetable Oil (HVO) as a "renewable diesel". HVO is a biofuelproduction pathway that differs from traditional biodiesel. This type of biofuel can be directly blendedwith conventional diesel without limits, but it comes with the same negative climate and social impactsas other biofuels if it is produced from food or feed crops [18].While HVO made from waste or residues (e.g. used cooking oil or animal fats) can in some cases bringemission savings, such feedstocks are only available in very limited volumes and are expected to beprimarily used to produce sustainable aviation fuels (SAF) [19]. Currently, 45% of HVO consumed is madefrom palm and palm derivatives, while used cooking oil and animal fats make up 20% and 19%respectively [20].High demand can incentivise fraud, such as mixing with virgin oil that can lead to deforestation [21], orinduce competition with existing uses, pushing non-biofuel industries towards unsustainable feedstocks[22]. There is little visibility regarding the sustainability of imported biofuels.Biomethane is the other main biofuel raising interest from the trucking sector. Like all biofuels, to be trulysustainable it can only be produced in limited quantities. What's more, methane slip can potentially wipeout all GHG savings compared to fossil gas [23].Gas truck manufacturers tout that GHG emissions can be reduced by 90%–95% when running onadvanced biomethane [24][25]. However, advanced biomethane is not a scalable climate solution fortrucks, due to its high price and low availability [10].7Therefore, advanced biofuels are not a scalable climate solution for road transport. Truckmakers who beton biofuels to decarbonise their sales receive a penalty of three points.2.2.3. e-fuelsProducing e-fuels is a highly energy-intensive process which makes inefficient use of renewableelectricity [26]. Refuelling a conventional truck with synthetic diesel would cost 50% more and emit 3times more GHG than driving a battery-electric truck in 2035 [27].8Production volumes will remain low in the foreseeable future, and would not suffice to meet demandfrom aviation, shipping, and the chemical industry, which have no alternatives to decarbonise [28]. As aresult, truckmakers advocating for e-fuels as a climate solution for new trucks are deducted three points.7 Advanced biomethane is produced from anaerobic digestion or biomass gasification of waste and residuefeedstocks.8 Compliant with RED II.A study by112.2.4. Supporting the introduction of fuels in the EU HDV CO2 standardsThe EU HDV CO2 standards apply to manufacturers, who have to cut their average fleet emissions eitherby improving the fuel efficiency of their new conventional trucks or by selling zero-emission trucks. Whilethe sections above look into whether a manufacturer sees bio- or e-fuels as long-term solutions for newtruck sales, this section analyses whether OEMs also support introducing a mechanism in the HDV CO2standards accounting for the contribution of so-called "renewable and low-carbon fuels" (e.g. a fuelcrediting system or a carbon correction factor). This is assessed based on truckmakers' responses to thepublic consultation for the review of the regulation [29].Supporting the introduction of fuels into the HDV CO2 standards signals that the truckmaker in questionseeks to divest itself from its climate responsibility, and instead shi the burden onto the energy sector.As a result OEMs in favour of including fuels receive a penalty of four points.2.3. Developing e-optimised trucks: /22 pointsBeing ready for the transition to zero-emission requires offering a broad portfolio of ZET models whichare optimised for the use of electricity or hydrogen.The design of future ZETs should not be dictated by the design of diesel trucks. For instance, freeing thespace under the cab traditionally reserved for the engine opens up new possibilities to redesign the cab,for example to improve aerodynamics or driver field of vision. The switch to electric powertrains alsocreates opportunities to integrate elements in the chassis to improve efficiency.Therefore, truckmakers earn points if at least one ZET model in their existing or planned portfolio has aclean sheet design with an e-optimised cab, its electric motor(s) integrated in the axle or wheels, or arange of at least 450 km:● E-optimised cab — In the EU, truckmakers have had the possibility of optimising their cab designto improve aerodynamics, direct vision, safety, and driver comfort since 2020. The extra cablength allowed since then (up to 90 cm) can help accommodate drivetrain components of ZEtechnologies. Redesigning cabs sends a strong signal that the OEM is committed to ZETs.Progressive truckmakers are expected to have ZE strategies that go hand in hand with their safetystrategy to improve drivers' field of vision.● Motor integration — improves truck efficiency, and shows that the OEM is redesigning theirtrucks based on what makes sense for electric drives, rather than sticking with what worked fordiesel powertrains.● Range — having at least one truck with a range above 450 km in the portfolio allows customers todecarbonise their long-haul operations [30], from where 73% of truck emissions originate [31].Lastly, trucks are used for a wide variety of operations, such as long-haul freight, urban and regionaldelivery, construction works, garbage collection, etc. Truckmakers are awarded points for offering a highnumber of medium and heavy ZETs which are adapted to different uses and can meet the needs ofdifferent customers.A study by122.4. Investing in the e-mobility value chain: /20 pointsAs truckmakers shi to ZETs, they must invest in new value chains to secure the most valuablecomponents in their trucks. For conventional trucks, most of the value lies in the diesel powertrain. Forbattery-electric trucks (BETs), the two most valuable components are the battery and the electric drive.For fuel cell electric trucks (FCETs), they are the fuel cell and the hydrogen storage system, with theelectric drive in third position [32].On batteries, truckmakers are awarded points for their industrial strategy on manufacturing battery cellsand packs, securing raw materials, recycling and reusing batteries, and innovation. The number of pointsdepends on supply security and commitment (e.g. in-house production, long-term agreement, etc).For other components, truckmakers earn points for manufacturing either the electric drive (e-motor ore-axle) or the fuel cell system.2.5. Charging and hydrogen refuelling strategy: /12 pointsLong-haul trucks, which operate for multiple days or weeks without returning to their depot, will needpublic charging and refuelling infrastructure for their operations. The majority of trucks in Europehowever drive less than 500 km a day and return to their depot overnight [30]. The majority of truckcharging will therefore occur at private or semi-public locations such as depots and loading places.Energy infrastructure for ZETs is still in its early stages of deployment. The Alternative Fuels InfrastructureRegulation (AFIR) was recently adopted, and will oblige all EU member states to develop a basic chargingnetwork. Truckmakers are awarded points for engaging in the rollout of this public infrastructure. Forprivate charging, fleet operators will need planning support to set up (semi-)private charging.Truckmakers are awarded points for supplying their customers with chargers or hydrogen refuelling (H2)supply; and providing consulting services to help them with site-planning,installation, routemanagement, etc.2.6. ZET financing: /6 pointsAs zero-emission truck production is ramped up, economies of scale will bring down the upfrontpurchase cost of ZETs. Today however, BETs are on average 1–2 times more expensive to purchase thantheir diesel counterparts and FCETs 2 times [30]. This can be a barrier for the many small and mediumenterprises (SMEs) in the sector to reap the benefits from the lower total cost of ownership (TCO) of ZETs.Truckmakers who provide innovative financing such as turnkey solutions (for example Truck-as-a-Service,EV-as-a-Service, Fleet-as-a-Service, or Mobility-as-a-Service) receive six points. OEMs who provide otherZET-dedicated financing, such as preferential interest rates or battery leasing, receive half of the points.A study by133. Results for legacy European truckmakersScania, Mercedes-Benz Trucks, and MAN are frontrunners in the transition to zero-emission, scoringabove 70 points (Fig.1). Volvo Trucks and Renault Trucks finish mid-table. IVECO trails a bit behind, andDAF comes last.Figure 1. Zero-emission readiness scores of legacy European truckmakersThe breakdown by category clarifies the different OEM strategies, and potential room for improvement(Fig.2). TRATON's Scania scores the highest on industrial strategy, as it has a large line-up of heavy ZETmodels, and a comprehensive battery value chain, charging, and financing strategy.Mercedes-Benz Trucks scores the highest on ZE ambition, as it aims to reach 60% ZET sales by 2030, and100% ZET sales by 2039. The main areas of improvement are securing battery raw materials, anddeveloping an e-optimised cab.Similarly to Scania, TRATON's MAN could raise its 2030 target (currently 40% for long-haul and 60% forurban and regional delivery). Additionally, it could improve its line-up by increasing the number of ZETmodels in its portfolio, and by deploying e-optimised cabs. Although MAN has developed such a cab forthe MAN CitE, this is only a concept vehicle. MAN's battery cell supply is secured in the long-term thanksto PowerCo, the battery division of TRATON's parent Volkswagen Group.Volvo Trucks' middle-of-the-road results in this readiness ranking is in sharp contrast with its currentperformance. In 2022, Volvo Trucks was the market leader in battery-electric truck sales in Europe, with a32% market share [33]. In the first quarter of 2023, its market share rose to 50% [34]. Looking at the globalA study by14ZET market in 2022 however, Volvo Trucks only held 1.1% of the market [4]. Volvo Trucks also shows themost ZE ambition for 2030, with a 70% ZET target.Despite being an early mover on ZETs, Volvo Trucks however does not appear committed to fully gozero-emission in the long-term. Its performance is weighed down by its support for gas trucks andbiofuels, though it opposes the inclusion of fuels in the HDV CO2 standards. Committing to 100% trulyzero-emission technologies by 2040 would go a long way in improving its score.Renault Trucks' strategy is closely aligned with Volvo Trucks, except for its lower 2030 target of only 50%ZETs.On industrial strategy, both of Volvo Group's OEMs could improve their model line-up to be able tocompete with frontrunners. None of their models have the e-motor integrated in the axle or wheels, andtheir only trucks with either an e-optimised cab or 450-km range are prototypes.The aforementioned OEM groups — TRATON (Scania and MAN), Daimler Truck (Mercedes-Benz Trucks),Volvo Group (Volvo Trucks and Renault Trucks) — have all invested in a common joint venture forcharging infrastructure: Milence. Milence aims at deploying fast and megawatt charging across Europe,with a stated goal of 1,700 charging points for trucks and coaches by 2027 [35].IVECO is the only OEM to receive all penalties, as it is fully betting on gas trucks and renewable andlow-carbon fuels to decarbonise its sales, going as far as supporting the inclusion of fuels in the HDV CO2standards. IVECO is the only truck OEM who is a member of the eFuel Alliance [37] and of the Natural &bio Gas Vehicle Association (NGVA) [38], two industry associations focused on e-fuel- and gas-poweredvehicles respectively.9DAF is the only European truckmaker without a public ZET sales target for 2030. As a result, it scores thelowest of all European OEMs on ZE ambition. DAF also scores the lowest on industrial readiness. Itsbattery supply is secured only through agreements with multiple suppliers, including a long-termagreement with Romeo Power (now acquired by Nikola Motor, and experiencing financial difficulties[39]).9 T&E's assessment is based on IVECO's response to the HDV CO2 public consultation. It should be noted that IVECO'sCEO Gerrit Marx recently called e-fuels the "champagne of propulsion" due to their high cost, recognising they arenot a viable way to decarbonise the automotive industry [36].A study by15Figure 2. Zero-emission readiness scores of legacy European truckmakers, broken down by categoryPlotting industrial strategy score (scaled to 100%) versus ZE ambition score (scaled to 100%) helpsidentify potential gaps between announcements and plans (Fig.3). This helps understand whereregulation can play a role to speed up the transition. For manufacturers receiving penalties, the dotrepresents the full score including penalties, while the range ends where the manufacturer would havescored without penalties for non-zero-emission technologies.Figure 3. Zero-emission ambition vs industrial strategy for European truckmakersA study by16Looking first at the frontrunners (ranked by industrial strategy score), Scania scores the highest onstrategy (88%), slightly overperforming the ambition of its announced targets (84%). MAN scores 75% onboth ambition and strategy, suggesting that its voluntary announcements are in line with its currentindustrial strategy. On the contrary, Mercedes-Benz Trucks scores the highest on ambition (100%), butfalls short on industrial strategy (74%). This is the largest ambition-strategy gap among Europeantruckmakers. This indicates a potential risk that they may not be prepared to meet their voluntary targets.The four remaining European OEMs all receive at least one penalty for pursuing non-zero-emission trucktechnologies as climate solutions. Their ambition score (scaled to 100%) is presented both with andwithout penalties. This is because penalties have a corrective effect, bringing ambition closer in line withstrategy.Volvo Trucks scores 65% on industrial strategy. This is far off its publicly announced climate leadership(81%), which scores even above MAN. Taking into account penalties for betting on gas and biofuels helpsunderstand where the implementation gap is coming from. Penalties reduce Volvo Trucks' ambition scoreto 59%, exposing its faltering long-term commitment to the transition. Similarly, Renault Trucks scores60% on industrial strategy, higher than its ambition with penalties (43%) but lower than its ambitionwithout (66%). IVECO scores 51% on strategy, higher than its 33% on ambition accounting for penalties,but lower than its ambition score based on voluntary announcements alone (66%). All three have a gapbetween their voluntary targets and their current industrial strategy.Lastly, DAF scores 33% on industrial strategy, higher than its ambition score with penalties (11%) andwithout (19%). This is primarily because of its very low level of climate ambition.3.2. Comparison to North American and Chinese truckmakersIn addition to ranking European OEMs against each other, their readiness to go to zero-emission is alsocompared to that of their counterparts in the US and China. This is of interest in the context of theongoing global race for industrial leadership on zero-emission vehicle technology, as well as to assesswhether a parent group possibly has different strategies depending on the region where a subsidiary isactive.Annex 1 explains how the Northern American and Chinese OEMs included here were selected. OEMswhich were analysed but scored under 15 points are excluded here. While some of these might representa large amount of sales in their own region, the purpose of this report is to contrast EU OEMs to leadingOEMs in other parts of the world which could either grow to threaten European industry leadership oncommercial vehicle technology, or which are connected entities to European OEMs and could impactinternal OEM group policy and regional prioritisation.Fieen of the OEMs analysed here score above 50 points (Fig.4), only six of which are legacy OEMs. Theoverall leader is Scania, followed by Mercedes-Benz Trucks, Tesla, MAN, and BYD US.A study by17When considering only legacy OEMs, European truckmakers appear to be better prepared than theirinternational competitors to go to zero-emission. However when looking only at new entrants, US andChinese ZE truckmakers far outcompete European startups.10European leadership is partially explained by a higher tendency to set targets. In Europe, DAF is the onlyOEM without a ZET target for 2030, and all OEMs have 2040 targets. But only two legacy Chinese OEMsand four legacy US OEMs have either 2030 or 2040 targets for ZET sales.Figure 4. Zero-emission readiness scores of selected truckmakers in Europe, China, and the US11Figure 5. Zero-emission readiness scores, broken down by category10 Here, a ZE truckmaker is an OEM which in a given region only produces ZETs. Some produce cars or buses withinternal combustion engines (e.g. BYD, Irizar).11 EDIT 27 June 2023: The score of Volta Trucks was corrected to account for information missing at the time of firstpublication.A study by183.2.1. United States & CanadaAll truckmakers responsible for at least 10% of truck production in the US and Canada were analysed, aswell as ZE truckmakers. Most legacy US OEMs are part of groups traditionally headed by Europeancompanies — e.g. Freightliner by Daimler Truck; Navistar by TRATON; Mack and Volvo Trucks by VolvoGroup. The exception is Paccar, a US OEM group which comprises Kenworth and Peterbilt in the US, andDAF in the EU.Tesla leads the US ranking despite having only one ZET model on offer, the Tesla Semi. The Semi meetsall quality criteria considered here: range, e-optimised cab, and electric drivetrain integration. In addition,Tesla is heavily invested in battery supply chains, and is the only US OEM to score all points on value chainstrategy.Xos offers 3 medium-duty and 3 heavy-duty ZETs, including the ET-One, a concept vehicle meeting allthree quality criteria. Xos also offers turnkey solutions called "Fleet-as-a-Service".Lion Electric is the only ZE OEM which offers financial services but no innovative turnkey solutions. It wasforced to develop its own battery strategy aer Romeo Power allegedly broke their long-term agreement.Aer it was purchased by Lion Electric's competitor, Nikola Motor, Romeo Power stopped supplying LionElectric with battery packs [40].TRATON's Navistar scores the highest among legacy US manufacturers, but well below TRATON'sEuropean brands Scania and MAN. Navistar has made conflicting statements about its long-term ZEambition, both claiming to have set clear ambitions of 100% ZE new vehicle sales by 2040 [41] andforecasting that 10% to 15% of long-haul applications will be fuelled by alternative fuels in the long-term[42].Daimler Truck's Freightliner is the only legacy US OEM other than Navistar to have set a target of 100%ZETs by 2040. It is also the only legacy US OEM to score all points on energy strategy. However,Freightliner's battery strategy appears limited to a long-term supply agreement between its parentDaimler Truck and CATL. Unlike Mercedes-Benz Trucks, Freightliner has not announced a ZET sales targetfor 2030.Following Freightliner are Volvo Group North America's two OEMs: Mack and Volvo Trucks. In spite of itslower ZE ambition — only a 35% ZET target for 2030 —, Mack outperforms Volvo Trucks North Americathanks to its industrial strategy. In particular, Mack offers Vehicle-as-a-Service to its customers.Volvo Trucks North America has set a target of 50% ZET sales by 2030, i.e. 20 points lower than itsEuropean counterpart. It currently leads the heavy ZET market in North America, owning a market shareof almost 50% in 2022 [33]. Its relatively poor performance in this ranking is due to a very low score onindustrial strategy. It scores the worst of all legacy OEMs on model line-up.A study by19Paccar's Kenworth and Peterbilt come last among selected US truckmakers, scoring slightly below theEU's DAF, which is also part of Paccar. They are the only US truckmakers included in this ranking whichhave not set ZET targets for 2030 or 2040. Instead, Paccar forecasts that by 2060, only 63% of its trucksales will be zero-emission [43].Ford is the only major US truck manufacturer not included in this ranking, due to scoring under 15 points.It is mostly focused on smaller medium-duty trucks such as pick-ups, which are used as passengervehicles rather than for freight. In the US, Ford is not yet active in the race to decarbonise trucks.3.2.2. ChinaChina currently leads the ZET market, with a 90% market share in global sales in 2022 [4]. Its legacytruckmakers are highly dependent on CATL for their batteries [5]. ZETs produced by legacy Chinesetruckmakers rarely have electric motors integrated into axles or wheels, or e-optimised cabs.All truckmakers accounting for at least 10% of Chinese truck production were analysed. Regarding ZEtruckmakers, China has the most ZE OEMs of all regions [44]. For simplicity, this analysis only looked atBYD, which currently is the only Chinese ZE truckmaker active on the EU market.12BYD US ranks fih in the overall ranking. It scores almost all points on value chain strategy, falling shortonly on battery reuse and recycling. BYD US offers EV-as-a-Service solutions to its customers, thus scoringall points on financing strategy. However, none of its models have at least 450 km of range, or ane-optimised cab; nor does it invest in a nationwide charging network.BYD China has more ZET models on offer (10 models) than BYD US (4 models), but it lacks innovativefinancial or energy services, hence why it scores lower than its US division.BYD Europe has the fewest number of ZET models of all three BYD divisions considered here (2 models).Like BYD US it offers chargers to its ZET customers; but it does not have schemes such as EV-as-a-Service.Trailing far behind BYD is Foton: the second largest manufacturer of both conventional trucks and ZETs inChina [5]. Foton held 10.9% of the global ZET market in 2022 [4]. Foton recently announced a target of50% new energy vehicles in 2030, but hasn't set ZET targets for 2040. To help its customers finance theirtrucks, Foton offers battery-leasing through a joint venture with CATL [45].Dongfeng Trucks is the largest manufacturer of ZETs in China, and made up 11.6% of the ZET market in2022 [4]. It has set a target of carbon neutrality in operations by 2040 [46], but lacks a 2030 target.Dongfeng scores relatively well on model line-up, as it offers seven medium ZETs and 4 heavy ZETs,including one model with a range above 450 km. However, it does not support its ZET customers witheither energy or dedicated financial services.12 Here, BYD qualifies as a ZE truckmaker as all the trucks it produces are ZETs, based on KGP data. However, BYDalso produces vehicles with internal combustion engines in other segments (e.g. cars).A study by20FAW is the largest truck manufacturer in China. It accounted for 6.0% of the global ZET market in 2022 [4].It is the only OEM analysed here with battery-swapping models on offer. The technology is currently ledby smaller players [5].CNHTC/Sinotruk comes last in this ranking. While it accounted for only 1.5% of the global ZET market in2022, it held 18.3% of the FCET market [4].All the legacy Chinese OEMs mentioned above are state-owned. As a result their supply of batteries andraw materials is assumed to be secure.3.2.3. European zero-emission truckmakersUnlike in other regions where new entrants perform better than legacy truckmakers,zero-emission truckmakers do not lead the ranking.in EuropeVolta Trucks pioneered Truck-as-a-Service, and its Volta Zero boasts a clean sheet design. Irizar is anestablished bus and coach manufacturer, and therefore has an existing value chain and energy strategy.Tevva is the only ZE truckmaker with a partnership to develop both charging and hydrogen infrastructure[47].134. Legacy truckmakersLegacy European OEMs demonstrate a wide range of readiness levels, going from three frontrunnersscoring above 70 points (Scania, Mercedes-Benz Trucks, MAN), to one laggard scoring below 30 points(DAF). Volvo Trucks scores above 50 points, while Renault Trucks and IVECO score under the average.Contrary to European OEMs, legacy US and Chinese OEMs are less likely to have set ZET targets forthemselves for 2030 and 2040, which negatively impacts their ZE ambition score. This is partly due to theforthcoming EU CO2 standards for HDVs having spurred EU OEMs to announce voluntary targets. Thisranking is developed from a European point of view where voluntary targets matter greatly forpolicymaking.When looking beyond voluntary targets to industrial strategy, none of the legacy US and Chinesemanufacturers develop their own battery packs or cells. Broadly speaking, European OEMs appear to bewell-positioned compared to their legacy competitors in the US and China. This is in spite of China'sfirst-mover advantage.13 EDIT 27 June 2023: The score of Volta Trucks was corrected to account for information missing at the time of firstpublication.A study by21For OEM groups with both European and US subsidiaries, the European divisions currently score higherthan their US counterparts. However, California just adopted its Advanced Clean Fleets Regulation, whichmandates manufacturers to sell only ZE medium-duty and heavy-duty trucks from 2036, withoutexception [48]. California is the US leader on environmental regulation, with other states usually adoptingsimilar standards. As a result, it is expected that US truckmakers will adapt their ZE strategy to meetCalifornia's diesel end date. Parent companies could shi investments away from Europe and into the USto cope with the most stringent regulation. Such a move could be aided by the broad financial supportavailable for battery and hydrogen supply chains under the Inflation Reduction Act.4.2. New entrantsBoth the US and China also have emerging champions with Tesla and BYD. Tesla ranks first in thisanalysis, and BYD ranks well in all three regions. Unlike smaller manufacturers, both Tesla and BYD haveexperience in rapidly scaling up manufacturing zero-emission cars. Together, Tesla and BYD make up 40%of the global battery-electric car market [49]. Unless legacy truckmakers get serious about ZETs, Tesla andBYD look poised to repeat their success story with zero-emission trucks.New entrants have the advantage of being able to focus on low-hanging fruit, that is to say segmentswhich are easier to electrify and where high volumes can quickly lead to economies of scale. But legacytruckmakers need to decarbonise their entire line-up, including truck segments where the economicbenefits of switching to ZETs take longer to materialise. Legacy OEMs must therefore ensure they movefast on high-volume segments to avoid losing their leadership to smaller ZE OEMs.4.3. Battery supply chainsLooking ahead, truckmakers should get more active in battery supply chains. Tesla, BYD, and TRATON arethe only manufacturers to have secured long-term supplies of battery raw materials. In all three cases,they benefited from their own or their Group's efforts to secure this supply for the car market segment.Other manufacturers are either less integrated with carmakers or not connected at all. As a result, theymust build their battery value chains from the ground up (alone or through partnerships), and risk beinglate to secure raw materials.Although Chinese OEMs other than BYD are heavily dependent on CATL for their batteries, in practice thisshould not hinder their transition to ZETs. Dongfeng, Foton, CNHTC, FAW, Shaanxi Auto are allstate-owned companies. As nine of the top ten battery cell manufacturers in 2030 are expected to beChinese, it is unlikely that Chinese OEMs will have trouble sourcing batteries. For example, they couldsource their batteries from CALB, a state-backed battery maker expected to be the third largest cellproducer in 2030 [50].A study by22Figure 6. Battery value chain scoreIn the US, the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) is expected to boost investments in battery manufacturing atthe expense of projects in Europe. Already, two-thirds of battery capacity planned in Europe is at risk as aresult of the IRA [51]. Parent companies with both European and US OEMs could prioritise developingbattery supply chains in the US, where production will be subsidised.With the target to sell only zero-emission trucks from 2036 in California now in place, these groups nowalso have a strong incentive to ramp up zero-emission production in the US, which could lead to thescoring of companies such as Freightliner, Navistar, Mack, Volvo Trucks, Peterbilt, and Kenworthimproving considerably over the next years. This will have important implications for Europeantruckmakers, as half of heavy trucks built in the US rely on European technology [52].By 2030, the US will almost triple its share of global battery cell production to 14% [53], from 5% currently[54]. China would remain the world leader, accounting for 69% of global production [53] (Fig.7).Figure 7. Share of global battery cell production by regionA study by23As a result, the leadership of legacy European truckmakers risks being challenged in coming years, unlessthey develop strong battery ecosystems, including not only cell manufacturing, innovation, and recycling,but securing raw materials as well.Based on announced gigafactory projects, European battery cell production has the potential to reach1.4 TWh in 2030 [55]. This would be enough to meet European battery demand in 2030 — estimated at0.9–1.2 TWh — for electric vehicles (both light- and heavy-duty) and energy stationary storage. However,regulatory certainty and a comprehensive European battery strategy is required to ensure plannedinvestments materialise.Regulations mandating them to increase production of zero-emission vehicles, such as the EU HDV CO2standards, can play a key role in ensuring Europe retains its global leadership. The ambition level of thelegislation's 2030 target will be key in that regard.5. Policy recommendationsThe Commission's proposed 2030 target of -45% CO2 reduction would result in only 28% of new trucksales to be ZETs in 2030. Yet, according to their own voluntary public targets, OEMs are already planningfor 47% of their sales to be ZETs in 2030. During talks with German authorities, European truckmanufacturers even indicated that 63% of new truck sales above 12t in Europe will be zero-emission in2030 [56] (Fig.8).Rather than lag behind voluntary announcements, regulation should lead the market. Therefore, T&Erecommends setting a 2030 target of -65% CO2 in addition to extending the scope of the regulation tosmall trucks and vocational and non-certified vehicles. This would result in 53% ZET sales in 2030 (alltruck categories combined), as on top of that T&E assumes engine efficiency to improve by 0.5%–1.3%per year.A study by24Figure 8. Summary of ZET uptake and stock in 2030 in different scenariosThe European Commission's HDV CO2 standards proposal does not label trucks running on e-fuels orbiofuels as zero-emission. While the oil industry and combustion engine supply chain is heavily lobbyingfor the inclusion of fuels in the regulation, almost all European OEMs are not in favour of such aninclusion. Together these OEMs account for 91% of EU sales [29, 57] (Fig.9).Figure 9. Market share in 2020 of EU truckmakers, and their position on including fuels in the CO2 standardsIVECO is in fact the only OEM in favour of including fuels in the HDV CO2 standards [29]. It lags behind newentrants and most of its European competitors. Rather than make the necessary investments todecarbonise its fleet, IVECO appears to want to keep selling its existing diesel and gas trucks on the vaguepromise that fuels will get cleaner.Lastly, a 100% CO2 reduction is needed to provide market certainty. California has recently adopted itsAdvanced Clean Fleets Act, which mandates all new HDVs to be zero-emission by 2036, without exceptionA study by25(including so-called vocational vehicles such as garbage and construction trucks). In comparison, theCommission's proposed target of 90% CO2 reduction by 2040, applying to only 80% of the market, fallsdisastrously short.While European OEMs appear to be better prepared than their US counterparts for now, such a gap inregulatory ambition could spell the end of European leadership in both climate policy and commercialvehicle technology. It is already clear that a large part of the EU OEMs good performance is based onvoluntary commitments, which in the absence of regulation might not materialise. T&E thereforerecommends setting a 100% CO2 reduction target in 2035. This is needed both for the climate and forindustrial leadership.A study by26A study by27Bibliography1. UNFCCC. (2021). National Inventory Submissions 2021. Retrieved from22). US Heavy-Duty Transport & Climate Change: How heavy-duty manufacturershave lobbied to weaken US climate policy while publicly promoting a zero-emission vehicle transition.Retrieved from Benefits of the 2020 Multi-State Medium- and Heavy-Duty Zero-Emission VehicleMemorandum of Understanding. Retrieved from BEV & PHEV Buses & CV Registrations.ICCT. Zero-emission bus and truck market in China: A 2021 update. Retrieved from The Stage 4 proposed amendment to China's heavy-duty vehicle fuel consumptionstandard: ICCT reflections. Retrieved from Promises, but no plans: How the EU can make or break the transition to zero-emissioncars. Retrieved from Survival curves.ACEA. (2020). All new trucks sold must be fossil free by 2040, agree truck makers and climateresearchers. Retrieved from Transport & Environment. LNG trucks: a dead-end bridge. Retrieved from Greenhouse Gas Protocol. (2016). Global Warming Potential Values. Retrieved from Hausfather, Z. Methane and other gases. In G. Thunberg (Ed.), The Climate Book.13. European Council. (n.d.). Infographic - Where does the EU's gas come from? Retrieved from14. Europe's energy crisis: What factors drove the record fall in natural gas demand in 2022?Retrieved from ACEA. Fuel types of new trucks: electric 0.6%, diesel 96.6% market share full-year 2022.Retrieved from Biofuels. Retrieved from Food not fuel: Why biofuels are a risk to food security. RetrievedA study by28from T&E. Globiom: the basis for biofuel policy post-2020. Retrieved from19. Estimating sustainable aviation fuel feedstock availability to meet growing EuropeanUnion demand. Retrieved from Stratas Advisors. Global Biofuels Outlook.21. Europe's surging demand for used cooking oil could fueldeforestation. Retrieved from Pigs do fly! The rise of animal fats in European transport. Retrieved from (2018). What is the role for renewable methane in European decarbonization? Retrieved from IVECO Natural Gas. Retrieved from Volvo Group. Renewable fuels. Retrieved from Electrofuels? Yes, we can … if we're efficient. Retrieved from E-fuels in trucks: expensive, scarce, and less green than batteries.Retrieved from Ueckerdt, F., & Odenweller, A. E-Fuels - Aktueller Stand und Projektionen. Retrieved from European Commission. Reducing carbon emissions – review of emission standards forheavy-duty vehicles. Have your say. Retrieved from Electric trucks take charge. Retrieved from Benefits of extending the EU heavy-duty CO2 emissions standards to other trucksegments. Retrieved from Smorodin, A. How much does an electric semi really cost? ICCT. Retrieved from Volvo leads the booming market for electric trucks. Retrieved from Sustainable Truck & Van. Electric trucks, Volvo still leading the market in the EU and NorthA study by29America. Overall registrations rising. Retrieved from Milence. Milence charging network accelerates Europe's shi to fossil-free road transport.Retrieved from Brambilla, A. E-Fuel Is "Champagne" Fix in EU Carbon Plan, Iveco CEO Says. Retrieved from eFuel Alliance. Members. Retrieved from NGVA. NGVA Europe Members. Retrieved from Ohnsman, A. Nikola Is Buying Struggling Battery Maker Romeo Power For $144 Million.Forbes. Retrieved from Randall, C. Lion Electric takes Nikola Motors to court. Retrieved from Navistar. Our Commitments. Retrieved from Roberts, J. Navistar CEO Calls for Long-Term Commitment to get to Net Zero. Retrieved from Paccar. PACCAR TCFD Report 2023. Retrieved 2023, from KGP. Commercial Vehicle Powertrain Forecast. H. ChinaTrucks. CATL, FOTON to Form Joint Venture for Battery Leasing Business. Retrievedfrom Xuan, F. 定了!东风柳汽"脱碳"时间表至2050年 H5V主打准重型高端市场 - 第一物流网.Retrieved from Bowdler, T. New partnership to provide Tevva UK fleets with electric charging and hydrogeninfrastructure. SMMT. Retrieved from CARB. Advanced Clean Fleets Regulation Summary. Retrieved from Shahan, Z. Tesla + BYD Nearly 40% Of BEV Sales Globally. CleanTechnica. Retrieved from Lee, D. CATL Should Bring More Joy Than Concern. Bloomberg New Energy Finance.51. How not to lose it all. Retrieved from Factsheet: Trucks. Retrieved from Benchmark Mineral Intelligence. Battery gigafactory plans slow down in April aer record2022. Benchmark Source. Retrieved 2023, from BloombergNEF. 2022 Lithium-Ion Battery Price Survey.55. A European Response to US IRA: How Europe can use its so and financial powers tobuild a successful electric vehicle value chain. Retrieved from study by30RA_report-1.pdf56. NOW. Market development of climate-friendly technologies in heavy-duty road freighttransport in Germany and Europe. Retrieved from CO2 emissions from trucks in the EU: an analysis of the 2020 reporting period. Retrieved2023, from57.58. Nikola announces changes to the Board of Directors. Also GerritMarx to step down. Retrieved from Collins, L. "Substantial doubt." Hydrogen news and intelligence | Hydrogen Insight. Retrievedfrom MarketScreener. HYZON MOTORS INC.: Notice of Delisting or Failure to Satisfy a ContinuedListing Rule or Standard; Transfer of Listing, Regulation FD Disclosure, Financial Statements andExhibits (form 8-K). Retrieved from study by31Annex 1. Market coverage of selected truckmakersThe core European truckmakers under consideration are IVECO Group's IVECO, Daimler Truck'sMercedes-Benz Trucks, Paccar's DAF, TRATON's MAN and Scania, and Volvo Group's Renault Trucks andVolvo Trucks. Together, they account for 98% of European truck production [44]. Daimler Truck's FUSO isnot analysed here due to its low share of European truck production (1%, [44]).The core North American truckmakers included in the analysis are all OEMs accounting for at least 10% ofUS and Canadian truck production. They are Daimler Truck's Freightliner, Ford, Paccar's Kenworth andPeterbilt, and Volvo Group's Mack and Volvo Trucks, and Ford. TRATON's Navistar, despite representingonly 6% of US truck production, was also included to provide a point of comparison to TRATON's MANand Scania. Together, they make up around 85% of US truck production [44]. Daimler Truck's WesternStar is not included due to its low share of US truck production (3%, [44]).The core Chinese truckmakers included in the analysis are all OEMs responsible for at least 10% ofChinese truck production: Foton, CNHTC/Sinotruk, Dongfeng, FAW, and Shaanxi Auto. Together theyrepresent more than 80% of Chinese truck production [44].The zero-emission truckmakers considered are all OEMs who in a given region only producezero-emission trucks. In Europe, they are BYD, Hyzon, Irizar, Tevva, and Volta. In the US and Canada theyare BYD, Lion Electric, Nikola Motor, Tesla, and Xos. In China, there are sixteen zero-emission truckmakersby this definition. Only BYD was analysed, as it is the only one with global presence.Lastly, Nikola Motor and Hyzon are both excluded from the report due to their current financial troubles[58, 59][60]. Results are not shown for OEMs scoring under 15 points.A study by32Annex 2. MethodologyInformation on OEM zero-emission strategies was collected from publicly available materials, such aspress announcements, company sustainability reports on Environment, Society, and Governance (ESG),brochures, etc. In some cases, data were obtained from personal communication, or were derived fromKGP Auto's tracking of ZET models [44].European OEMs were surveyed in April and May 2023 to provide them with the opportunity to correct orsupply additional information.The scoring methodology is originally derived from EV readiness ranking created by T&E to assesscarmakers' electrification strategies and was adapted to account for truck specificities [7]. The weightsattributed to each category were determined based on expert group consultation.The scoring methodology is adapted to the current stage of the transition to ZETs. In later stages, weightsassociated with supporting energy infrastructure deployment and offering dedicated financing will bereduced; while weights associated with securing raw materials should increase.CategoryPointsCalculation methodZero-emission ambition/40ZET share target in 2030/25ZET share target in 2040/1525 points for setting a ZET share target of 60% or above in2030, and no points for a target of 20% or under (in linewith what compliance with the current EU HDV CO2 2030target would require).Scores for shares between 20% and 60% are calculatedbased on min-max normalisation.15 points for setting a ZET share target of 100% by 2040,and no points for a target of 60% or under (as that is a10-year delay compared to what the climate urgencyrequires).Scores for shares between 60% and 100% are calculatedbased on min-max normalisation.Where the announced target includes non-ZETs, (e.g."fossil-free") it is assumed that ZETs make up 80% of theannounced target.Penalties for false solutions/-13GasBiofuels/-3/-3Minus three points for publicly promoting gas trucks as along-term climate solution.Minus three points for publicly promoting biofuels as along-term climate solution in new trucks.A study by33Synthetic fuelsFuel creditsIndustrial strategyModel line-upe-optimised cabMotor integration inaxle/wheelsRange above 450 kmNumber of (planned) heavyZETsNumber of (planned) mediumZETs/-3/-4/60/22/4/4/4/6/4Minus three points for publicly promoting synthetic fuelsas a long-term climate solution in new trucks.Minus four points for supporting the inclusion of a fuelcrediting mechanism in the HDV CO2 standards.Four points if at least one model in their planned ZETline-up has an e-optimised cab (only two points if thatmodel is a concept vehicle or part of a research project).Four points if at least one model in their planned ZETline-up has its motor(s) integrated in the axle or wheels.Four points if at least one model in their planned ZETline-up has a range above 450 km (only two points if thatmodel is a prototype)Six points for offering the highest observed number ofzero-emission heavy-duty trucks (7). Scores for numbersof models between 0 and 7 are calculated based onmin-max normalisation. For OEMs who are not active inthe medium-duty segment, the number of planned heavyZETs is scored out of ten points instead of out of six.Four points for offering the highest number ofzero-emission medium-duty trucks (7). Scores fornumbers of models between 0 and 7 are calculated basedon min-max normalisation.Components value chains/20Battery manufacturing(excluding cells)Battery cell manufacturingSecuring raw materialsManufacturing electricdrivetrain / fuel cellFour points for in-house production; three points for astrategic partnership, or for state-owned Chinese OEMs (inwhich case supply is assumed secure); two points for along-term supply agreement; one point for havingmultiple suppliers.Four points for in-house production (including fromparent company, or an OEM belonging to the same group);three points for investment or long-term agreementcombined with in-house pilot production, or forstate-owned OEMs; two points for a long-term agreement;one point for having multiple suppliers.Three points for securing a long-term supply of batterymaterials (including from its parent company).Four points for in-house production of either the e-motor,e-axle, or fuel cell; three points for a joint venture or/4/4/3/4A study by34Battery recyclingBattery R&D / innovationEnergy strategyInvesting in charging networkProviding chargers / H2 supplyConsulting services for chargingFinancing strategyZET financing/3/2/12/6/3/3/6/6strategic partnership; two points for a long-termagreement; one point for a joint project; 0.5 point forhaving multiple suppliers.Three points for in-house, or doing recycling throughpartners; 1.5 point for a joint research project; 0.5 pointfor a non-specific statement on reuse and recycling.Two points for in-battery R&D.Six points for investing in charging network (includingthrough a joint venture)Three points for providing chargers or H2 supply tocustomers.Three points for providing charging consulting services tocustomers (e.g. site planning).Six points for providing turnkey solutions, or three pointsfor other ZET-specific financing services (e.g. batteryleasing, lower interest rates).A study by35Annex 3. Summary of results for legacy European OEMsFunded by the European Union. Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do notnecessarily reflect those of the European Union or CINEA. Neither the European Union nor CINEA can be heldresponsible for them.A study by36
