---
id: 42722156-0f11-5101-8ca7-3e9d717b5d17
title: "Unlocking electric trucking in the EU: recharging along highways"
date: 2021-04-21T01:00:00
office: Brussels
publication_type: Report
article_url: https://www.transportenvironment.org/articles/unlocking-electric-trucking-eu-recharging-along-highways
pdf_url: https://www.transportenvironment.org/uploads/files/202102_pathways_report_final.pdf
doc_ids: [42722156-0f11-5101-8ca7-3e9d717b5d17]
---

# Unlocking electric trucking in the EU: recharging along highways

> Limits to battery range and fast charging infrastructure have previously made the electrification of long-haul trucking difficult. However, technological improvements have made this not just a possibility but the best option for decarbonising long-haul trucking. As charging remains one of the biggest challenges, T&E's study assesses the charging infrastructure needed for long-haul trucking to become carbon neutral.

Transport & EnvironmentPublished: April 2021In house analysis by Transport & EnvironmentAuthors: Simon Suzan (analysis and modelling) and Lucien Mathieu (policy recommendations)Expert group: Thomas Earl, Tiziana Frongia and Fedor UnterlohnerEditeur responsable: William Todts, Executive Director. Unlocking Electric Trucking in the EU: long-haul trucksFor more information, contact:Simon SUZANFreight data analystTransport &: Square de Meeûs, 18 - 2nd floor | B-1050 | Brussels | Belgium | @transenv | fb: Transport & EnvironmentAcknowledgementsThe authors kindly acknowledge the external peer reviews by Dr. Patrick Plötz and Steffen Link fromFraunhofer ISI, and other external reviewers who gave valuable feedback. The findings and views putforward in this publication are the sole responsibility of the authors listed above. The same applies toany potential factual errors or methodological flaws.A study by2Executive SummaryThe potential of battery electric heavy-duty trucks to mitigate climate change and reduce airpollution is commonly underestimated. This is especially true for the current European policyframeworks, notably the EU Smart and Sustainable Mobility Strategy, which is extremely shy on itsambitions for zero emission trucks (80,000 vehicles on the road in 2030). While most of the urbanand regional delivery applications could already be covered by battery electric trucks today,long-haul battery electric trucks are only a few years behind. Just as the European Commission ispreparing its climate law package of the generation, this report shows that most long-haul roadfreight can be directly electrified and explains what's needed to do so.Trips over more than 400 km make about 5% of all trips in Europe but represent 40% of the EU'stotal truck activity (in tonne-km or tkm) and are estimated to account for 20% of trucks' emissions.Battery electric trucks with ranges beyond 400 km will come to the market before mid of thedecade and are likely to represent the most cost-competitive option, and hence the dominantpathway, to decarbonise long-haul trips. Hydrogen fuel cell trucks will be offered by some truckmakers only in the second half of the 2020s, and can be expected to play a role at ports andindustrial clusters where they can benefit from synergies with other hydrogen applications.The report provides a quantitative analysis of how much charging infrastructure for electric truckswill be required in the next decade to electrify main highway corridors based on European trucktraffic flows.FindingsBased on a novel methodology, this report shows that electric truck adoption and deployment ofthe associated charging infrastructure should be prioritised alongside Europe's largest highwaycorridors - e.g. between Hamburg and Berlin. The analysis finds that targeting the core network ofthe Trans-European Transport Network (TEN-T) is the optimal strategy for the coming decade toIn particular, deployment of truck chargingachieve zero-emission long-haul road freight.infrastructure should start from the regions identified here as 'TEN-T regions':● These regions are 'hotspots' for long-haul freight activity as they connect all major urbanareas in Europe.● Trips coming to or from one of these regions make up 80% of the total EU road freightactivity (tkm) and 88% of the total long-haul activity.Based on OEMs' announcements, three scenarios for battery electric truck uptake have beenconsidered: the Baseline scenario based on existing zero-emission truck targets from truckmakers; the EV-Leaders scenario which assumes the market follows the leading truck makers; andthe Road-2-Zero scenario: T&E's scenario compliant with mid-century climate neutrality.A study by3T&E's approximated TEN-T network used in this studyPrioritising charging infrastructure roll-out at the 25,000 km of main TEN-T's corridors isdemonstrated to be an effective strategy in which electric trucks cover 12%, 18% and 25% of thetotallong-haul road freight activity in 2030 respectively in the Baseline, EV-Leaders andRoad-2-Zero scenarios. As a result, CO2 emissions from long-haul road freight would be reduced by11%, 16% and up to 23% in 2030.T&E calculates that in 2030 there should be a total of 4,400 high-power public chargers in the EU27and 6,600 destination chargers (at the distribution center) in the scenario compatible with climateneutrality. This translates into a need of about one public charger for every 35 electric trucks andone destination charger for every 21 electric trucks. Total cumulative upfront investments indestination and public high-power chargers would amount to €1.9 billion over the next decade, oran average annual investment of €190 million, which is only 0.2% of the annual EU €100 billioninvestment in transport infrastructure.A study by4Combined results from T&E's urban, regional and long-haul truck analysesWhen combining all truck trips (urban, regional and long haul), T&E scenarios indicate between236,000 and 617,000 battery electric trucks on EU27 roads in 2030. These trucks will need up to31,400 destination chargers and 17,400 public chargers, cumulating €23 billion upfrontinvestments between 2020 and 2030. Finally, both short- and long-haul electric trucks will avoidup to 59 MtCO2 emissions in 2030, representing a 32% reduction compared to current heavy-dutytrucks emissions in the EU27.A study by5RecommendationsWith the right policy and charging infrastructure deployment, road freight can be decarbonised toa great extent in the 2020s. To achieve this, a number of legislative and policy changes will benecessary to accelerate both the supply of electric trucks and the deployment of charginginfrastructure at the depot (overnight charging), at the distribution center (destination chargingor semi-public charging) and at publicly accessible locations (public charging). Policymakersshould start this today and bring about a comprehensive strategy to rapidly electrify all deliveries.First, the revision of the Alternative Fuels Infrastructure Directive (AFID), planned for June2021 as part of the EU Green Deal, should finally cover electric trucks and recognise directelectrification as the dominant pathway to decarbonise urban, regional and long-haul deliveries.The AFI Directive should be turned into a Zero Emission Infrastructure Regulation (ZEIR),focusing exclusively on electricity and green hydrogen:● Moving from 'alternative fuels' to 'zero emissions' effectively removes natural gas fromthe scope of the 'alternative fuels' that currently get preferential EU treatment andfunding.● An EU regulation, rather than a directive, is essential to ensure a harmonised frameworkand implementation across the EU and a swi adoption.The new ZEI Regulation should set the following targets for electric truck charging to ensure theminimum and essential coverage of the road network:● Urban areas: binding targets for public charger roll-out at urban nodes with a minimumof four public chargers per urban node in 2025, increasing to ten public charge points in2030 (at least 350 kW).● Destination charging: all medium and large logistics hubs should have at least oneopportunity charger (350 kW or higher) from 2025.● Highway: at least one public charging station with a minimum of 4 charging points every100 km of the TEN-T Core network by 2025 and at least one every 50 km by 2030. Theseshould be equipped with high power chargers (HPC) with at least 700-800 kW.Overall the revised AFID should aim at a total of around 10,000 public and destination chargersin 2025 (EU27) increasing to 40,000-50,000 public and destination chargers in 2030. To ensurethese targets are effectively reached, the EU should set minimum binding targets per MemberState.The revised AFID should recognise that grid preparation is key for the future roll out of truckcharging infrastructure and ensure that charging locations (public parking and distributioncenters) are prepared with sufficient grid connections as early as possible. Moreover, the EUA study by6should ensure that when a truck parking site is built or renovated under the Safe and SecureTruck Parking Areas framework, the grid connection is sufficient for the future truck chargingdemand.With regard to the deployment of refuelling infrastructure for hydrogen trucks, it is crucial tofollow the hydrogen truck market, to ensure investment is balanced to the actual needs of thefleet. Sea ports should be prioritised for initial pilot projects, and should be targeted under therevision of the AFID. Ports and industrial clusters represent a no-regret starting point to roll outhydrogen refuelling stations for trucks as this will create synergy effects with hydrogen's futureapplication in the shipping and industry sectors. Sea ports will also serve as major landingterminals for hydrogen imports from offshore or overseas production sites.Second, the revision of the TEN-T Regulation, which is set to take place in parallel of the AFIDrevision, should double the number of TEN-T urban nodes (from 88 today) with another set ofcomplementary 'freight' nodes and clearly identify the main TEN-T Core networks wheredeployment of truck charging should be prioritised. The revision should also strengthen the 'lowcarbon urban delivery' requirement at urban nodes to make them EU's leaders for zero emissionmobility. This should be complemented with a strategy from local and national authorities toset a clear path towards zero-emission freight deliveries by extending vehicle zero emissionzones to freight and engage the transition with the various stakeholders.The future of trucks is electric. The EU stands a chance to become a world leader in the transitionto zero-emission road freight. With the revision of the AFID, it can enable electric trucking tobecome the new norm in Europe, staying on track with its Green Deal ambition.A study by7Table of contentsAbbreviationsIntroduction1. Roadmap for e-truck charging1.1. Urban and regional deliveries: a low hanging fruit1.2. Long-haul trucks: the next milestone2. Analysis of long-haul truck flows2.1. Overview of the database2.2. Key corridors for long-haul freight in the EU2.3. Truck activity along the TEN-T core network3. Uptake of electric trucks3.1. Scenarios3.2. Assumed electric trip shares4. Results: assessment of the electrification4.1. Quantification of electric trips and electric truck activity4.2. Long-haul electric trucks4.3. Electricity consumption4.4. Charging infrastructure requirements4.5. Charging infrastructure costs4.6. CO2 savings4.7. Combination of results from Vol. 1 and Vol. 25. Hydrogen trucks6. Policy recommendations6.1 Revision of the AFID6.1.1 Zero Emission Infrastructure Regulation (ZEIR)6.1.2 Geographic coverage: Binding targets at urban areas and along highways6.1.3 Binding targets - EU overview6.1.4 Binding targets per Member States6.1.5 Grid connection6.2 Revision of the TEN-T Regulation6.3 Finance: Accelerating the uptake of electric trucksA study by86.3.1 EU Recovery Fund & Recharge flagship6.3.2 CEF Transport Blending Calls & Strategic Rollout Action Plan7. Annexes7.1. T&E's approximated TEN-T core network7.2. T&E's BET truck activity modelling7.3. Charging infrastructure estimate7.5. Detailed results per country - Truck activity electrified (Mtkm)7.6. Detailed results per country - Energy needs (GWh)7.7. Detailed results per country - Long-haul electric trucks7.8. Detailed results per country - Public HPC chargers7.9. Detailed results per country - Destination chargers7.10. Detailed results per country - Depot chargers7.11. Detailed results per country - Overnight chargersReferencesA study by9AbbreviationsAFIDBETGVWHDVHPCMCSOEMAlternative Fuels Infrastructure DirectiveBattery Electric TruckGross Vehicle WeightHeavy Duty VehicleHigh Power ChargingMegawatt Charging SystemOriginal Equipment ManufacturerTEN-TTransEuropean Transport NetworkTTWWTWZEVTank-to-WheelWell-to-WheelZero-Emissions VehicleA study by10IntroductionWhile heavy-duty trucks account for less than 2% of the vehicles on the road in Europe [1], theyrepresented 22% of CO2 emissions from road transport in 2019 [2] and their emissions are growing fast(+9% between 2014 and 2019). The EU CO2 emission reduction targets for new heavy duty vehicles willdrive the electrification of new vehicles and will open new opportunities for the EU's industry. MajorEuropean truck-makers have already committed to sell 100% fossil-free trucks by 2040 [3] and some ofthem have ambitious electric truck sales targets for the next decade.In February 2020, T&E published a roadmap for electric truck charging [4] which outlines a policystrategy for the EU to decarbonise the road freight sector and bring it in line with the EU's Green Dealcommitments. Following this roadmap, T&E published the first volume of the Unlocking electrictrucking in the EU series (hereinaer referred to as Vol. 1) [5], focusing on urban and regional electrictrucking, analysing charging infrastructure requirements based on in-house modelling of Europeantruck flows.1In this report, we carry out a similar quantitative analysis as done in Vol. 1 but with a focus onlong-haul truck flows. The objective of this study is to provide analytical evidence on how muchcharging infrastructure is needed in the EU to support the deployment of long-haul electric trucks upto 2035. The analysis focuses on the Trans-European Transport Network (TEN-T) core network [6]where most road freight is taking place across the EU. This new evidence shall contribute to creating abetter understanding of what can be expected in the next decade with regards to the uptake of electricheavy-duty vehicles as well as providing a solid basis for future policy and regulation, in particular forthe revision of the Alternative Fuels Infrastructure Directive (AFID) [7] in 2021.Section 1 of this report gives a brief summary of the main findings from Vol. 1 and provides anoverview of T&E's roadmap for electric truck adoption in the EU. Section 2 investigates long-haul truckflows across the TEN-T network while Section 3 presents three scenarios for battery electric truckadoption, based on OEM's new announcements. Section 4 describes the outcome of the analysis andassesses the impact of the electrification of long-haul trips in terms of energy requirements, charginginfrastructure and CO2 emissions avoided. Section 5 details T&E's views on potential roles for hydrogenin decarbonizing road freight. Finally, Section 6 lays out T&E's policy recommendations to acceleratethe deployment of electric heavy-duty vehicles charging infrastructure, focusing on the revision of theAlternative Fuels Infrastructure Directive.As for Vol. 1, this study is based on a database of European freight movements which is the result ofthe ETIS Plus project [8], a European Commission DG MOVE research project. This analysis has beenconducted for EU27+UK+NO+CH road freight movements. We provide EU27 specific figures only1 Long-haul trips are defined in this study as trips above 400 km.A study by11in the policy recommendations section. For more details on the database, the methodology and themodelling of this project, please see the separate methodology note [9].1. Urban and regional deliveries: a low hanging fruitAs modelled and analysed in Vol. 1 [5], battery electric trucks are the most promising solutions todecarbonise urban and regional deliveries. Half of the EU's total truck activity (in tonne-kilometres, ortkm) is driven over distances of less than 300 km. These trips could be covered by battery electrictrucks coming to market today, thanks to new models coming to the market with about 300 km range(enough to cover nine trips out of ten). But limited supply and the lack of charging infrastructurecurrently slows down the uptake.This analysis found that targeting charging infrastructure deployment in the EU's largest urban areas isessential for the uptake of battery electric trucks in the next few years. Based on a novel methodology,the report showed that the roll-out of battery electric trucks and the associated charging infrastructureshould be prioritised in 173 medium and large urban areas in the EU, so-called 'urban nodes'. Theseurban nodes combine three factors that justify their prioritisation:● They are 'hotspots' for freight activity: trips coming to or from the urban nodes make up half ofthe total EU freight activity (tkm) and 39% of trips.2● Trips include a large share of short trips: 15% of total freight activity occurs within urban nodesFinally, this report demonstrates that prioritising charging infrastructure roll-out at the 173 urbannodes could be a cost-effective strategy in which electric trucks cover 9%, 14% and 24% of the total EUroad freight activity in 2030 respectively in the Industry-Baseline, EV-Leaders and Road-2-Zeroscenarios (or 16%, 30% and 43% of the trips). As a result, CO2 emissions from road freight would bereduced by 8%, 13% and up to 22% in. Long-haul trucks: the next milestoneAll truck makers are starting to offer battery electric trucks with up to 300 km range in the long-haulvehicle segment (typically above 26 tonnes gross vehicle weight, GVW) and most have committed tobattery electric vehicles as the future for urban and regional deliveries but also for the long-haulsegment. As shown in Figure 1, it is expected that the range of the battery electric trucks available will2 Trips are defined as tonnes transported divided by the average truck payload (the payload considered was 10tonnes per truck for Vol. 1 and will be 12.5 tonnes per truck for this study)A study by12increase to 500 km in the coming years, covering about two thirds of kilometers and 19 trips out of 20;and then include the tractor-trailer segment (40/44 tonnes GVW).Figure 1: Battery electric truck models above 25 tonnes GVW expected in the coming yearsThe recent announcement of ACEA to only sell fossil-free trucks by 2040 [3] as well as recent individualtruck manufacturer announcements like Scania [10], MAN [11] and Renault [12] will deliver even morezero-emission trucks on the roads in the next decade. Furthermore, new manufacturers are coming tothe market, such as Nikola Motors which announced they will start producing the first long-haulbattery electric truck in Europe starting in 2021 in a joint venture with Iveco (range up to 480 km) [13]or Tesla's semi truck which is expected to be launched in 2022 with an 800 km range [14]. Table 1 givesan overview of the announced battery electric models in the long haul segment.33 MAN announced that 40% of long-haul trucks and 60% urban and regional delivery vehicles will bezero-emission in 2030 when Scania aims at 50% of its sales to be battery-electric in 2030.A study by13Table 1: Battery electric models with a range above 300 km expected before 20252. Analysis of long-haul truck flows2.1. Overview of the databaseAs for the first volume of this series, this report is built on the analysis of European road freightmovements that was the result of the ETIS Plus project [8] (see Info box). As the ETIS Plus project wascalibrated with 2010 data, T&E updated the freight volumes and trip lengths based on Eurostat data[15], to the year 2018. The methodology [9] that accompanies Vol. 1 describes in greater detail how thecalibration was undertaken, the data treatment utilised, and the scope of analysis.ETIS Plus database: a brief overviewETIS Plus was a research project in the 7th Framework Programme lasting from 2009 to 2012. Theunderlying database is a granular origin-destination (O/D) matrix of goods transported by road,inland waterways, and rail, by freight type. It covers all countries of the European Union, at theNUTS3 region level (see below for more). The resulting map (see Figure 2) shows the traffic flowsthroughout Europe resulting from the freight flows. The roads with the busiest traffic match closelywith the TEN-T core network and are heavily concentrated around and between the key urban areas.As detailed in T&E's Methodology note [9], this database has been calibrated with Eurostat 2018data.A study by14Figure 2: Map of truck flows based on the ETIS project O/D matrixThe geographical granularity of the data goes down to the level of a small region based on the EurostatNUTS3 classification used for official EU statistics [16]. The origin and destination of trips are thus oneof the 1,348 small regional level entities called NUTS3 regions, or simply referred to as 'regions' in thispaper. Although the size of the regions can vary slightly from one country to another based on nationaladministrative territorial division, the average size of a NUTS3 region is 3,500 km2, which can beapproximated by a disk with a radius of about 33 km.2.2. Key corridors for long-haul freight in the EUAs defined in the EU Regulation (1315/2013) [6], the Trans-European Transport Network (TEN-Tnetwork) includes all the main freight routes in the EU, as it can be seen in Figure 3. These keycorridors interconnect the 88 urban nodes that were analysed in Vol. 1. While electrifying the urbannodes is a logical starting point for the decarbonization of road freight, the next milestone is toelectrify main long-haul routes in Europe, in other words electrifying the most frequented highways.A study by15Figure 3: TEN-T corridors as defined in the EU TEN-T regulation [17]In this report, the TEN-T core network has been approximated as the busiest connections between the88 urban nodes defined in the Regulation. This network modelled by T&E is a combination of regionsmaking up the TEN-T core network, meaning that these regions are crossed by TEN-T freight routes(i.e. highways). These regions are named TEN-T regions and include urban nodes. Furtherinformation on the network modelling can be found in Annex 1.Applying the methodology mentioned above resulted in the network show in Figure 4, which has beenused as the basis for the analysis of long-haul truck activity.A study by16Figure 4: Approximated TEN-T network used in this studyThe total length of this approximated network is about 30,700 km, slightly above the 24,500 km lengthof the 9 main corridors covering the core network [18].Finally, this model showed that the average mass of freight carried on the network is about 540,000 tper section per year, with the busiest sections of the network presented in Figure 5.44 Since the dataset from the ETIS Plus project only takes into account truck activity from a region to another, it isnot possible to quantify truck flows from a subsection of a trip (i.e. truck flows from a region A to a region B donot include trucks flows from a region C to a region D passing through the connection between A and B).A study by17Figure 5: Most frequented sections of the TEN-T core network2.3. Truck activity along the TEN-T core networkIn the previous section, the TEN-T core network has been approximated as a set of TEN-T regions.Thanks to this approximated network, it has been possible to analyse truck flows with new trips types:● TEN-T to TEN-T trips have their origin and destination in a region connected to the network.● TEN-T to X (same as X to TEN-T) trips have their origin in a region connected to the networkand destination in a region not connected to the network, or vice-versa.● X to X trips are trips between regions not connected to the networkThese trip types are shown schematically in Figure 6, with the example of France. The green shadedurban nodes are connected by the straight line modelled TEN-T network. The regions which fall underthese network branches, or are within a certain distance of them, are defined as being TEN-T regions;all other non connected regions are shaded in dark blue. In the right hand side of Figure 6, the differenttrip types as listed above are shown.A study by18Figure 6: Illustration of TEN-T to TEN-T, TEN-T to X and X to X tripsAbout 7 trips out of 10 in Europe either leave or arrive (or both) at a region connected to the TEN-Tnetwork. Trips connecting two regions on the network (TEN-T to TEN-T) account for about 5 trips outof 10, while trips between a TEN-T region and a region not connected to the network account for 2 outof 10 (TEN-T to X).Long-haul trips (defined as above 400 km), which are the main focus of this study, account for 38% ofEurope's truck activity but 41% of the total TEN-T truck activity (TEN-T to TEN-T and TEN-T to X), asshown in Figure 7. At least 8 out of 10 long-haul trips have an origin or destination on the network,resulting in only 12% of long-haul activity not being carried over the network. This explains why theTEN-T network is a key target for the decarbonization of long-haul trucks.A study by19Figure 7: Breakdown of trips and truck activity among the TEN-T networkFinally, the observation of the long-haul truck activity (in tonne-kilometer) breakdown per distanceband shows that 53% of truck activity are made between 400 km and 1000 km, with an average triplength of 652 km in this distance band. Figure 8 shows the road freight (in Mtonnes) breakdown perdistance bands and per trip type. It highlights that about 74% of tonnes carried over more than 400 kmare transported between 400 km and 1000 km. Trips above 1000 km are very likely to last multipledays, which therefore explains why road freight can be observed in the 2000 km distance band.A study by20Figure 8: Breakdown of road freight above 400 km3. ScenariosIn this section, three scenarios for battery electric truck sales up to 2035 are presented. The first twoare based on industry announcements and the last one is based on a trajectory compatible withreaching a zero-emission road freight sector by 2050. These scenarios slightly differ from Vol. 1because of recent announcements made by major truck makers and now differentiate between shortand long-haul truck sales, short-haul being trips below 400 km (regional and urban deliveries) andlong-haul being trips above 400km.A study by21As already mentioned in Section 1.2, MAN [11] announced that 40% of their long-haul trucks and 60%urban and regional delivery new sale vehicles will be zero-emission in 2030 when Scania [10] aims at50% of its sales to be electric in 2030. Renault Trucks predicts that electric vehicles will represent 10%its sales volume by 2025 and 35% by 2030 [19] [12] while Iveco expects to sell 8%-10%ofzero-emissions trucks (>16t) by 2025 and 20% by 2030 [20] and Volvo foresees 7% and 19% electrictrucks in 2025 and 2030 respectively. Finally, Daimler, Iveco, Scania, Volvo Group (Volvo Trucks andRenault Trucks), DAF and MAN all announced their commitment to sell 100% fossil-free trucks in 2040[3]. These announcements are summarised in Table 2 and helped to build the scenarios presentedbelow.5Table 2: Zero-emissions trucks objectives per OEMIndustry-Baseline scenarioTruck makers will need to comply with the EU CO2 emission reduction targets of -15% in 2025 and -30%in 2030 on a fleet average, compared to a 2019/2020 baseline.In this first scenario, thetruck manufacturers would rely to a very large extent on fuel efficiencyIndustry-Baseline,5 This was presented by Volvo Trucks during a public event as an indicative value for where trucks needed to goto comply with CO2 standards.A study by22improvements to comply with the CO2 regulation which leads to lower uptake of zero-emissionstrucks.The announcements presented above suggest that in this most conservative scenario, the averagesales shares for battery electric trucks would be at least 2.8% in 2025 and 20% in 2030. In 2035, weassumed the sales shares of electric trucks to be 40% in this scenario. Based on the newannouncements presented above, the additional number of electric trucks compared to Vol. 1 havebeen extrapolated as long-haul trucks (electric trucks in Vol. 1 were assumed to be short haul). For2030, based on a truck fleet comprising 70% short-haul trucks and 30% long-haul trucks according tothe TRACCS database [21], this translates into 21.4% and 16.7% of short-haul and long-haul truckssales being battery electric respectively; or 293,000 battery electric trucks on the road in 2030.6This is already higher than what ACEA, the automotive industry lobby group, has announced [22]:20,000 battery electric trucks on the road in 2025 and 200,000 in 2030 (above 16t). Which would meanthat the EU average sales market share for electric trucks would be at 1.3% in 2025 and 15% in 2030.EV-LeadersAssuming that OEMs that did not make any announcement would at least sell 5% of battery electrictrucks in 2025 and 20% in 2030, this leads to a scenario with 6.2% battery electric trucks sales in 2025and 27.5% in 2030. Cumulatively, this EV-Leaders scenario would in total represent 458,000 batteryelectric trucks on the road in 2030. In this scenario the assumed share of sales in 2035 is 70%.Road-2-ZeroTo be aligned with the Paris Agreement objectives and the European Green Deal commitments, the EUmust have a zero-emission road transport sector by 2050. The scenario modelled here is based onT&E's 2050 transport decarbonisation strategy [23], where the last internal combustion truck(including PHEVs and HEVs) has to be sold between 2035 and 2040.In this scenario, 12% of truck sales in 2025 would be battery electric, up to 40% in 2030 and 100% in2035, including both short-haul and long-haul trucks. This is already quite close to the most ambitiousannouncements made by OEMs (see Table 2 above). Cumulatively this would amount to about 734,000in 2030.Figure 9 shows the total battery electric truck (BET) fleet for all scenarios and all trucks categories.6 In this conservative scenario, OEMs that did not announce any target are considered to be selling 0% ofbattery-electric trucks in 2025 and 2030.A study by23Figure 9: T&E battery electric truck fleet uptake scenarios, EU27+ UKOn the market sales side, the scenarios presented above are summarized in the following table:Table 3: Battery electric trucks sales shares for the different scenariosA study by24Therefore, even in the most conservative scenario, much more zero-emissions trucks are expected onthe roads compared to the European Commission target of 80,000 lorries in 2030, as described in theSmart and Sustainable Mobility Strategy (SSMS) [24].3.2. Assumed electric trip sharesSince urban nodes will be electrified first and these nodes are the basis of the TEN-T network, tripswhich are carried out exclusively on the TEN-T network will have a higher uptake of battery electricIn practice, this means that a strong andtrucks sales than trips from and to other regions.comprehensive policy and investment strategy needs to be implemented along the main freightcorridors (i.e. highways) to electrify long-haul deliveries, thanks to charging infrastructure at depots,distribution hubs and public locations.In this report, public charging along highways is done based on the High Power Charging (HPC) andon public overnight charging. In addition, destination and depot charging is assumed to be adequatelydeployed at the relevant locations along the network. This means that trucks are assumed to alwaysleave with a full battery in the morning because they are always able to charge during the night (depotor public overnight charging). They can also charge between two trips while (un)loading (destinationcharging) or at public HPC chargers (short top-up or during mandatory rest periods). Importantly,public charging will be essential along the network to ensure that all trip lengths can be covered.7Truck activity modellingThe share of electrification for each trip type (as shown in Figure 10) has been calibrated to match thethree electric truck uptake scenarios shown in Figure 10. For each distance band, the share of truckactivity has been calculated in order to get the total truck activity targeted for each scenario.For new electric trucks and for the first operating year, the activity is estimated to be around1,450,000 tkm per truck and per year (average payload of 22.7 tonnes from TRACCS data [21], with 55%payload factor from Riccard-AEA [25], and an average mileage of 116,000 km from the EU Regulation[26]). This activity per new truck can be up to 3 times the current average activity per truck in the fleetas the fleet includes many old trucks having a very low annual mileage.8In order to properly estimate the truck activity of the BET fleet over time, a decreasing annual mileagein line with the ageing of trucks has been taken into account: the older a truck gets, the less it is driven.7 In addition to highways, public charging thanks to HPC chargers can also be done in frequented regions withsignificant truck flows.8 The average activity per truck was 446,000 tkm in 2018 according to Eurostat and 540,000 tkm in 2010 for trucksabove 20 tonnes according to TRACCS.A study by25Based on T&E's European Union Transport Roadmap Model (EUTRM) [27], it has been assumed thatthe annual mileage decrease rate would be similar for battery electric trucks and diesel trucks. Inpractice, battery electric trucks are expected to drive more than diesel trucks, especially for the firstyears, as it will make economic sense to operate them at the highest mileage possible.Because the number of long-haul BETs increases over time, the average mileage and thus the averagetruck activity per truck only slightly decreases. This is considered a conservative approximation, asBETs will be cheaper to run based on TCO analysis [28], and thus may be used more intensely than theICE equivalents.9Electrification scenariosThe details of the truck electrification scenarios are presented in Figure 10. The share of electrificationis higher for shorter trips and trips between TEN-T regions as the network will be first covered withcharging infrastructure. Trips that connect a TEN-T region with another region which is not in theTEN-T network (noted 'TEN-T to X' in Figure 7), are less likely to be electric because either the triporigin, the trip destination or the route between both is lacking the sufficient charging infrastructure.Finally a limited number of electric trips are assumed for X-X trips because of scarce charging locationswithin these regions and battery range limitations. In 2035 in the Road-2-Zero scenario, the maximumpotential is reached for TEN-T to TEN-T trips: these trips will be 100% electrified. Detailed assumptionsper trip type and distance bands can be seen in Annex 4.9 From 1,450,000 tkm/truck/year for new BETs, the average truck activity in the fleet gets to 1,280,000 tkm/truckin 2025, 1,120,000 tkm/truck in 2030 and to around 1,000,000 tkm/truck in 2035.A study by26Figure 10: Electric long-haul truck uptake - scenarios illustrationA study by274. Results: assessment of the electrificationIn this section, the impact of the three scenarios presented above is analysed through differentmetrics: trips electrified, truck activity electrified, number of long-haul electric trucks, number andtypes of chargers needed, charging infrastructure costs and CO2 emissions avoided.4.1. Quantification of electric trips and electric truck activityT&E EU road freight modelling from ETIS databaseAs detailed in Vol. 1, for every two NUTS3 regions of the EU, the O/D matrix provides informationabout the flow (in tonnes and tkm) of goods transported between the origin region and destinationregion. T&E's model allocates to each of these pairs a given share of electrified trips (see Figure 11),depending on the distance between the origin and the destination while taking into account higherelectrification shares when the origin or destination (or both) is taking place on the TEN-T network.As a result of the model, the total volume of goods transported via long-haul electric trucks can becalculated as the sum of the volume of goods transported via electric trucks for all origin anddestination pairs. This volume of goods transported via electric trucks is then compared to theoverall volume of goods transported.This approach does not take into consideration regional or trip disparities, but gives an overview ofhow road freight flows could be electrified. For more details on the limitations of this approach, seethe sensitivity analysis investigated in Vol. 1 [5].Applying this methodology, this gives for the Industry-Baseline scenario an electric trips coverage of18.9% in 2030 compared to all European long-haul truck trips (Figure 11). In the EV-Leaders scenario,we find that 28.0% of long-haul truck trips are electric in 2030 in Europe, with TEN-T to TEN-T electrictrips representing more than 5 trips out of 10 in this scenario.Finally, the Road-2-Zero scenario is a more ambitious scenario where the TEN-T network movestowards full electrification by 2035 where 100% of TEN-T to TEN-T trips and 81% of TEN-T to X areelectrified. As a result, in this scenario, 36.7% of long-haul trips are electrified in 2030.A study by28Figure 11: Share of long-haul truck trips electrified, EU27+UK+NO+CHLooking at truck activity, in the Industry-Baseline truck activity electrified reaches 11.8% in 2030 inEurope. This corresponds to an average low level of electrified trips across the EU where electric truckuptake is focused on trips taking place on the TEN-T network. As shown in Figure 12, in the EV-Leadersscenario, we find that 17.7% of the long-haul truck activity is electrified in 2030. Finally, 24.7% of theEU truck activity would be electrified in 2030 in the Road-2-Zero scenario.A study by29Figure 12: Share of long-haul truck activity electrified, EU27+UK+NO+CHAs the TEN-T core network moves more ambitiously on electrification of long-haul road freight, anincreasing share of the trips going through the network are electrified. See figures in Annex 5 for anoverview of the total volume of road freight activity electrified in each scenario.4.2. Long-haul electric trucksIn the following section, the total volume of activity is calculated at the level of each region by lookingat the total activity of trucks arriving in one region. This is then used to estimate the respective numberof chargers and trucks, which is proportional to the volume of activity arriving in that given region.As explained in Section 3.2, the average truck activity of the BET fleet evolves over the year since theaverage fleet age increases from 0 years in 2022 (first long-haul BETs sold) up to 4.4 years in 2035. ThisA study by30results in a higher truck activity per truck for battery electric trucks compared to the current fleet,since new vehicles tend to drive much more than the average fleet. This is expected to hold trueespecially for electric trucks since they have lower utilisation costs and the economic incentive to usethem is therefore higher.Figure 13: Long-haul battery electric trucks uptake, EU27+UK+NO+CHLong-haul electric trucks amount to 580,000 vehicles in Road-2-Zero 2035, which translates into about45% of the long-haul fleet being electrified (see Figure 13). This compares to an approximate 85% ofthe tonne-kilometers being electrified in the same scenario (see Section 4.2). This again shows thatelectric trucks will be carrying much more goods than the average long-haul fleet. Table 4 summarizesthe battery electric long-haul trucks required in each scenario.A study by31Table 4: Number of electric long-haul trucks on the road in the different scenarios,EU27+UK+NO+CHLooking at the EU27 only, we calculate that there would be 7,300, 67,000 and 209,000 long-haulelectric trucks in 2025, 2030 and 2035 respectively in the Industry-Baseline scenario; 10,900, 100,000and 370,000 electric trucks in the EV-Leaders scenario; and 17,900, 140,000 and 536,000 in theRoad-2-Zero scenario.4.3. Electricity consumptionThis section aims to quantify how much energy will be required to recharge the long-haul electrictrucks on the road for the different scenarios. This will subsequently be converted into charginginfrastructure requirements.In order to assess the truck energy consumption, the average energy needed per tkm has been used.This has been calculated from the average efficiency and the average mileage for each year. As for thetruck activity presented in Section 3.2, the average kWh/km for the fleet has been estimated based onthe energy efficiency of new trucks expected in the coming years. From 1.52 kWh/km in 2020, theenergy efficiency of new trucks entering the fleet is expected to reach 1.21 kWh/km in 2030 [29]. Thistranslates into a fleet average of 1.39, 1.27 and 1.23 kWh/km in 2025, 2030 and 2035 respectively.10As expected, an important share of the total energy recharged by electric trucks is needed at regionsconnected to the TEN-T network given that this is where the majority of the activity takes place (Figure14). In the Road-2-Zero scenario, the final energy consumption from long-haul electric trucks wouldreach about 17 TWh in 2030, which would represent about 1.7% of the total renewable electricityproduced in the EU in 2018 [30]. In the EV-Leaders scenario, the total demand in 2030 would reach 12.4TWh, while it would be 8.3 TWh in 2030 for the Industry-Baseline scenario.10 These energy consumptions take into account 5% charging losses from the plug.A study by32Figure 14: Energy requirements for charging long-haul electric trucks, EU27+UK+NO+CHFinally, the average energy consumption needed for long-haul electric trucks along the TEN-T corenetwork is estimated to be up to 4 times lower than the energy consumption needed for long-haultrucks in urban nodes. In the Road-2-Zero scenario and in 2030, this energy consumption would forinstance be around 8.1 GWh per TEN-T region while it would be about 31.9 GWh per urban areaconnected to the network.A study by334.4. Charging infrastructure requirementsIn this section we calculate the number of chargers of each type required: depot charger, destinationcharger, public fast charger (or high power chargers [HPC]) and public overnight charger.4.4.1. Approach and assumptionsIn order to estimate the number of chargers needed to fulfill the energy needs presented previously,several assumptions have been made to describe each charger type: the charging power (kW), theutilisation rate (number of operating hours per day) and the split between the different chargers (whatproportion of energy is delivered by each type of charger). These assumptions are summarized inTable 5.The actual average power required to charge the trucks' battery for each charger has been estimatedfrom the average trip distance of the BET fleet. This results from the truck flow modelling in 2025, 2030and 2035, the battery-capacity needed at each stop, the average charging time per charger and theaverage energy consumption per km. This approach takes into consideration the fact that in practice,most BETs will not arrive at the charging location with an empty battery and will therefore not need tofully charge at each stop, especially for the decade to come with trucks assumed not to be doing thelongest distances. It has been therefore assumed that in 2025 only 60% of the battery capacity will berecharged at each stop, which will then increase to 70% in 2030 and 80% in 2035.Given that long-haul trucks will cover longer distances than urban and regional delivery trucks, andthus will likely be away from their depot, the share of public chargers is expected to be higher than itwas in Vol. It was therefore assumed that 40% of the total energy consumed by electric trucks wouldbe charged at public chargers, of which 20% will be public opportunity (HPC) chargers and 20% publicovernight. The rest is expected to be covered by depot chargers (45%) and destination chargers (15%).The formulas and calculations used to estimate the charging infrastructure requirements presentedhere are detailed in Annex 3.Assumptions(averages)Averagemaximumcharging powerCharging timeYearallDepotPublicovernightDestinationPublic HPC150 kW350 kW620 kW730 kW850 kW8 h/truck1.5 h/truck45 min/truckA study by kW55 kW64 kW246 kW292 kW492 kW585 kW339 kW698 kW45%20%15%20%6 h/day7 h/day8 h/day3 h/day4 h/day4 h/day3 h/day4 h/day5 h/dayTable 5: Summary of key charging assumptionsFleet averagereal worldpower duringchargingShare of totalenergydeliveredUtilization4.4.2. ResultsFrom the assumptions presented above and the energy needs detailed in Section 4.3, it has beenpossible to calculate the number of each charger type required to power the fleet of BETs. This hasbeen determined by dividing the total energy needs in each scenario by the annual energy that can bedelivered by each charger and taking into account the share of each charger type in the total energyneeds (see Annex 3 for more detailed information).11Destination chargersLong-haul trucks tend to spend one hour or more at the distribution center (or logistics hub) to loadand unload cargo [31]. T&E assesses that one destination charger would be required for every 21long-haul electric trucks in 2030. This is based on assuming 350 kW maximum power charging but withan average 292 kW for the fleet with the methodology explained above, and a utilisation rate of 4 hoursper day. As a result, in the Road-2-Zero scenario a total of 7,100 destination chargers would be neededin 2030.In the EV-Leaders scenario this amounts up to 5,100 chargers in 2030; and in theIndustry-Baseline scenario, 3,400 chargers.Depot chargersConsidering 150 kW maximum power chargers, 55 kW average power and 7 hours of utilization per dayIn 2030, as depot chargers are mostly overnight chargers and long-haul trucks do not charge at thedepot every night, the average trucks per depot chargers is estimated to be around 2 in 2030. For the11 We assume that all chargers are operational 6 days per week, 52 weeks per year, to consider potentialdowntime for maintenance work when chargers are not available to truck drivers.A study by35Road-2-Zero scenario, this leads to a total of 65,000 depot chargers in 2030. In the EV-Leaders scenario,it amounts up to 46,500 in 2030; and 31,000 in the Industry-Baseline.Public fast chargers (HPC)As long-haul trucks cover trips greater than 400 km, public fast charging will be essential on highways,allowing trucks to drive longer distances than their battery range. These chargers need to be powerfulenough to charge batteries during the 45 minute legal breaks that truck drivers need to take every 4.5hours [32]. Assuming 20% of the total energy is delivered at public fast chargers, that the charger isused 4 hours per day on average in 2030 and given that we calculate average power of 585 kW for fastcharging points (see above), there would be a need for one fast charger for every 32 long-haul electrictrucks per charger in 2030.This translates into 2,300 HPC opportunity chargers in 2030 in the Industry-Baseline scenario, 3,400 inthe EV-Leaders scenario and 4,800 in the Road-2-Zero scenario.Public overnight chargersAs public HPC chargers, public overnight chargers will be essential for trucks driving longer trips overseveral days. These chargers will need to be installed on rest areas along highways where drivers arealready used to spending their night in their sleep cabs. As for the depot, 150 kW maximum power, 55kW average power and 7 hours of utilization per day are assumed in 2030. This gives an average ratio of5 long-haul electric trucks per public overnight charger in 2030.Looking at scenarios, the total number of public overnight chargers is expected to reach 13,800 in 2030for the Industry-Baseline scenario. In the EV-Leaders scenario this will be 20,600 in 2030; and 28,900 inthe Road-2-Zero scenario.Figure 15 presents the total number of chargers needed in each scenario for the three periodsconsidered. Table 5 summarizes the ratio of battery electric trucks per charger type, as describedabove. Moving towards, high power chargers and destination chargers could also be used as publicovernight chargers in some cases, as it could optimize the chargers utilization.Finally, looking at the EU27 only, 6,600, 4,700 and 3,100 destination chargers are calculated for 2030 inRoad-2-Zero, EV-Leaders and Industry-Baseline respectively. On the other hand, 4,400, 3,100 and 2,100high power chargers and 26,700, 19,000 and 12,700 public overnight chargers are needed for eachscenario.A study by36Figure 15: Long-haul electric truck chargers requirements per scenario, EU27+UK+NO+CHTable 6: Ratio of long-haul battery electric trucks per chargerA study by374.5. Charging infrastructure costs12Significant investments will be needed in charging infrastructure deployment to serve the growing BETmarket. To determine the magnitude of these investments, we conduct an upfront capital investmentsestimation. These costs have been modelled assuming 500 €/kW for depot and public overnightchargers, 430 €/kW for destination chargers and 400 €/kW for HPC for 2020, and with a 1.5% costreduction rate per year. This results in cost ranges of 60-70 k€/charger for depot and public overnight,120-140 k€/charger for destination chargers and 230-260 k€/charger for HPC chargers.13Annual upfront investments in the deployment of all charging points would then increase from zerotoday, up to about €160-390 million per year for, increasing further to €630-1,260 millionper year for and €780-2,300 million per year for.Looking at total cumulative upfront investments needed, this gets up to €800-2,000 million for, €3,900-8,200 million for and €7,800-19,900 million for in Europe (seeFigure 16). The same upfront investment in the EU27 would represent €700-1,800 million for, €3,600-7,600 million for and €7,200-18,400 million for These upfront investments do not include operational costs or grid connection costs. This will be the focus of aforthcoming study commissioned by T&E.13 These figures have been assumed based on bilateral exchanges with truck makers and literature references.A study by38Figure 16: Cumulated upfront investment costs needed, EU27+UK+NO+CH4.6. CO2 savings15Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from medium and heavy duty trucks totalled 198 MtCO2 in 2019 in[2]. Commercial vehicles emit roughly 100the EU27+UK according to the UNFCCC emissionsgCO2/tkm (Tank-to-Wheel [TTW] emissions) on average. Looking more precisely at regulated trucksand according to ACEA [33], TTW emissions get down to around 59 gCO2/tkm for long-haul becausethese trucks have much higher activity compared to the average truck. For regulated urban andregional deliveries, the average increases to 152 gCO2/tkm. Here, to calculate the total emissions, theemission factors for regulated trucks are multiplied with the respective tkm for both short andlong-haul trips.14We calculate that the heavy duty trucks emissions reach up to 211 MtCO2 (40 MtCO2 for trips above 400km and 171 for trips below 400 km). These values are slightly higher than the UNFCCC, which could be14 232 MtCO2 from heavy-duty vehicles and buses, where a 85 % / 15% split has been applied.15 CO2 intensity per tonne-kilometerA study by39explained by the fact that only regulated trucks have been taken into account. These estimates fromACEA's values serve as the basis for the emission comparison below as the UNFCCC global emissionsdo not give the split between short and long-haul truck categories, nor between trucks and buses.Thanks to diesel truck efficiency improvements, mainly driven by the truck CO2 regulation, CO2emissions per tkm of the diesel truck fleet are assumed to improve by 7.5% in 2025, 12.5% in 2030 and15.2% in 2035in all scenarios, compared to 2020. Based on this, and as shown in Figure 17, wecalculate the total direct CO2 savings from shiing a given part of the road freight activity from diesel toelectric.16In the Road-2-Zero scenario in 2030, the annual TTW savings are about 9 MtCO2. In the EV-Leadersscenario, the TTW emissions savings are about 6.4 MtCO2, roughly equivalent to truck GHG emissionsfrom the Netherlands (6.0 MtCO2) and in the Industry-Baseline scenario, these emissions savings onlyreach up to 4.3 MtCO2).When taking into account indirect emissions from diesel extraction and processing [35] as well as theGHG emissions from the electricity generation based on the ENTSO-E projections [36], then total GHGemissions avoided increase from 32 MtCO2 to 34 MtCO2 in 2035, meaning that the upstream emissionsfrom the fuel production (diesel and electricity) roughly cancel each other out.1716 New ICE trucks improvements could reach up to 21% in 2030 compared to 2020, according to the ICCT [34]. Theaverage fleet improvement is then calculated based on the amount of ICE trucks sold each year. No more fuelefficiency is assumed aer 2030. However, this 21% diesel trucks improvement is unlikely to happen as mosttruck makers are counting on zero-emission trucks to comply with the CO2 standards.17 On average, indirect (WTT) emissions from diesel vehicles increase the tailpipe emissions (TTW) by 28%.A study by40Figure 17: TTW and WTW emissions avoided, EU27+UK+NO+CHAs shown in Figure 18, in the climate-compatible scenario, in 2030 up to 23% TTW CO2 emissionreduction can be achieved compared to long-haul current emissions, with long-haul heavy trucksrepresenting about 20% of all trucks' emissions. In the EV-Leaders and Industry-Baseline scenarios,only 16% and 11% emissions reduction could be achieved.A study by41Figure 18: Emissions reduction compared to current emissions from long-haul trucks,EU27+UK+NO+CH4.7. 2Combining urban and regional deliveries results from Vol. 1 and long-haul deliveries results from Vol.2, truck activity electrified is expected to reach up to 33% of all tonne-kilometers in 2030; which meansthat 37% of urban and regional tkm will be electrified and 25% of long-haul in the best-case scenario.Since urban and regional deliveries account for around 95% of trips today, most of the trips electrifiedare expected to be on the short-haul side with 41.8% of all trips, and 1.7% of long-haul all trips (Figure19).A study by42Figure 19: Vol. 2 comparison: trucks flows electrified in 2030, EU27+UK+NO+CHLooking at final energy consumption, short and long-haul electric trucks would represent up to 67.8TWh in 2030 in the Road 2 Zero scenario, 42.8 TWh in the EV-Leaders scenario and 26.6 TWh in theIndustry-Baseline scenario. This energy would be consumed by 678,000 trucks in the best-casescenario, 425,000 trucks in the intermediate scenario and 264,000 trucks in the baseline scenario.Considering only the EU27, these three scenarios will see a final electricity consumption between 23.8TWh and 71.8 TWh in 2030 and a fleet of between 147,000 and 617,000 battery electric trucks.From the charging infrastructure perspective, both studies combined reach a total estimate ofbetween 257,000 and 673,000 chargers in,000-35,000 destination chargers and 8,000-19,000public HPC chargers), as shown in Figure 20, and upfront investments between €10 billion and €25billion over the decade to come (). This translates into 11,900-31,400 destination chargersand 6,700-17,400 public chargers in the EU27, requiring upfront investments between €9.3 million and€22.9 million for the upcoming decade.A study by43Figure 20: Destination and public chargers for urban & regional trucks (Vol. 1) and long-haultrucks (Vol. 2), EU27+UK+NO+CHLooking at the ratio of electric trucks per chargers in 2030, combining Vol. 2 would give 12.6battery electric trucks per public and destination chargers and 1.1 battery electric trucks per depotand overnight chargers (Table 7), whether it is by looking at Europe or at the EU27 only.A study by44Table 7: Battery electric trucks per charger for urban & regional (Vol. 1) and long-haul (Vol. 2)Finally, results from Vol. 2 suggest that electrifying short and long-haul trucks in Europewould avoid up to 65 MtCO2 (TTW) in 2030, translating into a 31% emissions reduction compared to2019 emissions from heavy-duty trucks (Figure 21). On the EU27 perspective, it would avoid up to 59MtCO2 (TTW) in 2030, which would represent a 32% emissions reduction compared to 2019 emissions.These emissions reductions will be mainly done thanks to urban and regional deliveries as theyrepresent most of the trips.A study by45Figure 21: Emissions reduction from urban & regional trucks (Vol. 2),EU27+UK+NO+CH5. Hydrogen trucksMost European manufacturers are planning to begin series production of fuel cell electric trucks onlyfrom the second half of the 2020s [12] [37] [38] [39]. Previous T&E analysis has shown that long-haulbattery electric trucks with an 800 km range will likely represent the most cost-effective option todecarbonise long-haul trucking and would also likely be cheaper than fuel cell electric trucks if, forexample, the renewable hydrogen is produced overseas under ideal conditions and shipped to Europe[28].Road freight is a business and transport operators will opt for the most cost-competitive vehicletechnology provided that it offers sufficient operational flexibility and can use a dense and reliableinfrastructure network.It is highly unlikely that hauliers would be willing to pay an additionalpremium for technologies which offer a significantly higher vehicle range if their real-worldA study by46operational profile actually does not require it. On the contrary, it should be expected that hauliers willopt for a vehicle range that does not go beyond their route and flexibility requirements in order toreduce costs.Ultimately, the economic cost-competitiveness of the two vehicle technologies will depend on howtheir respective economies of scale will evolve over the coming decade. Automotive batteries arecurrently experiencing a self-reinforcing dynamic which will drive down their costs dramatically due tothe accelerating ramp-up in the passenger car market and this is soon expected to spill over to theurban and regional delivery truck segment and, subsequently, to long-haul trucking.Fuel cells and hydrogen storage tanks will likely not see substantial cost reductions due to the lack oflarger scale before the second half of the 2020s. Other potential fuel cell markets such as maritimeshipping or stationary back-up applications will likely not scale up to any critical extent before the2030s. This will likely make it extremely challenging for hydrogen trucks to attain any sizable marketshare in the heavy-goods vehicle segment in the next decade.However, hydrogen fuel cell trucks could be part of the solution in particular for demandinglong-distance applications where a combination of range and operational flexibility is necessary. Theremight also be other niche applications where hydrogen trucks may benefit from range- or cost-relatedadvantages. For example, off-road vehicles such as dump trucks for mining operations may needhigher amounts of energy stored onboard due to their exceptional operational uptime requirementsand lower recharging or refuelling flexibility [40]. Likewise, vehicles for heavy-load and special roadfreight movements may need larger onboard energy storage as a result of specific operational needs,such as range or higher energy consumption. Remote areas which lack the necessary gridinfrastructure for high-power charging could be another possible application scenario for fuel cellelectric trucks.18Hydrogen trucks could also have an operational and cost advantage for drayage applications in andaround sea ports and their adjacent economic hinterland since container swaps are characterised byshort pick-up times and because they would benefit from synergy effects and lower costs with the useof hydrogen to decarbonise maritime shipping [41].In the context of the wider energy transition and the imperative to fully decarbonise all economicsectors including the power, industry and heating sectors, substantial additional renewable electricitycapacity will be needed in Europe. Renewable electricity should therefore be used as efficiently aspossible. Because the decarbonisation of the aviation and shipping sectors as well as otherhard-to-abate sectors such as industry will rely on electricity-based fuels and renewable hydrogen in18 This will be subject to future analysis in an upcoming publication, which will assess potential roles of hydrogentrucks.A study by47particular, direct electrification should take precedence in road transport wherever feasible, includinglong-haul trucking [42].Proponents of renewable hydrogen in road transport oen refer to the need of temporary andseasonal energy storage in a fully renewables-based power system. It is, however, disputable, whetherroad transport should be used for such storage capacities. There are likely more cost-effective optionsto balance and store renewable electricity which should be exploited first: additional interconnectorcapacities between EU countries, load levelling and peak shaving through cross-sectoral demandmanagement, temporary stationary battery storage to balance daily surpluses and pumped storagefacilities in Northern Europe for longer electricity storage needs. Renewable hydrogen imports couldbe used to balance seasonal renewables fluctuation by using it in gas peaker plants to generateelectricity [43].Hydrogen refuelling infrastructure in major EU ports by 2027In regards to the deployment of refuelling infrastructure for hydrogen trucks, sea ports should beprioritised for initial pilot projects. Ports and industrial clusters represent a no-regret starting point toroll out hydrogen refuelling stations for trucks as this will create synergy effects with hydrogen's futureapplication in the shipping and industry sectors. Sea ports will also serve as major landing terminalsfor hydrogen imports from offshore or overseas production sites which will improve the initialbusiness case for these hydrogen trucks by lowering their initially high fuel costs.The European Union should adopt deployment targets for sea ports by 2027. Given that most of themain ports are also urban nodes, high-power electric charging infrastructure also needs to bedeployed at these locations.6. Policy recommendations6.1 Revision of the AFID6.1.1 Zero Emission Infrastructure Regulation (ZEIR)The Directive on the deployment of Alternative Fuels Infrastructure, or AFID [7], sets a regulatoryframework for the roll out of public recharging and refuelling infrastructure for the followingalternative fuels in transport: electricity, CNG, LNG and hydrogen. The current directive dates back to2014 and its revision is part of the European Green Deal as a key element of the EU's decarbonisationstrategy for the road transport sector.The current Directive doesn't cover charging infrastructure for electric trucks and only sets targets fornatural gas refuelling infrastructure when it comes to heavy-duty vehicles. This conflicts with theEuropean Green Deal, as evidence shows that there are no significant climate benefits in shiing fromdiesel to fossil gas nor it will help decarbonise road freight [44]. In relation to biomethane, the latestA study by48evidence shows that volume of renewable gas that can be sustainably and cost-effectively produced islimited, and that it would not be sufficient to meet the relevant demand from transport (the totalrenewable methane potential in the EU in 2050 is only 11% of the total demand from heavy dutyvehicles and ships, see Section 1.3 of T&E truck charging roadmap for more details [4]).It is high time that the revised AFID framework starts taking electric trucks seriously by including themin the scope of the technologies and setting appropriate binding targets for their charginginfrastructure. This opportunity can not be missed as it would put a halt to the development of a newmarket where European industry stands a chance for global leadership [45].First and foremost the revision of the AFID should be coherent with the European Green Deal: Targetson gas refuelling infrastructure should be taken out of the revised legislation as they are not asolution to decarbonise road freight transport. All natural gas refuelling infrastructure will rapidlybecome stranded assets as there is increasing pressure for cities to go zero emission and increasingsupply of cost-effective electric trucks. The focus needs to shi exclusively to zero emissiontechnologies: electricity and hydrogen. As such, the AFI Directive should be turned into a ZeroEmission Infrastructure Regulation (ZEIR), focusing exclusively on electricity and hydrogen.The definition of what qualifies as an 'alternative fuel' (or a zero emission one) is of paramountimportance because it shows what fuels the EU considers to be compatible and coherent with it'sGreen Deal ambition. This definition is also at the heart of many EU and national funding programmes(including regional and structural funds). For example CEF Transport Blending calls, which are themain tool to finance alternative fuels infrastructure and vehicles, links directly the definition ofalternative fuels eligible for funding with the AFID definition [46].The AFID should be changed from a Directive to a Regulation, in line with the EU subsidiarityprinciple, to allow for a swi adoption and implementation. If the revised framework stays a Directive,it is unlikely that any target would be set before 2025 as it would take an additional 2-3 years tolaw. A regulation also allows for a more harmonisedtranslate the directive into nationalimplementation as current national plans have led to a fragmented approach with regards to roadfreight fuels, putting some regions at risk to be le behind in the e-mobility transition and greatlyreducing the business opportunities. Harmonisation is also essential for the various industry playersto streamline their activity rather than have tailored specifications for each market.Finally a regulation opens the possibility for the EU to set requirements and targets on market playerslike shippers operating distribution centres. The scope of the revised AFID can then be widened toaddress destination charging of electric trucks at medium and large distribution centers (private orshared industrial premises and are used during loading or unloading of trucks). When relevant, itshould be made possible that these chargers can be shared between the different transport operatorsaccessing the delivery center.A study by496.1.2 Geographic coverage: Binding targets at urban areas and along highwaysUrban areasThe revised framework should set binding targets for the deployment of public and destinationcharging infrastructure at urban nodes for 2025 and 2030 (as shown in T&E's previous report onurban and regional deliveries [5]).Deploying charging infrastructure at medium and large urban areas will enable the decarbonisation ofurban and regional delivery trips thanks to a growing and maturing battery electric truck market,already in the first half of the 2020s. As part of the revision of the TEN-T Regulation, road freightactivity hot spots, or 'freight urban nodes' should be identified as locations where the deployment ofcharging infrastructure would maximise the benefits of the roll-out of the initial charging network.Accordingly, the revision of the AFID should set the following targets for the deployment of publiccharging at urban nodes for 2025 and 2030 (at least 350 kW): a minimum of four public chargers perurban node in 2025, increasing to 10 public charge points in 2030.Deployment of public charging at urban nodes should be further incentivised in the first half of the2020s to meet the demand of early adopters.For destination charging, all medium and large logistics hubs should have at least one opportunitycharger (350 kW or higher) from 2025.HighwayWith long-haul battery electric trucks (400-500 km range) expected to hit the market in the first half ofthe 2020s, it is crucial that the essential highway networks across the EU are covered with high powercharging infrastructure to enable long distance trips.The revised AFID should require at least one megawatt charger (MCS) charging station with aminimum of 4 charging points every 100 km by 2025 and at least one site every 50 km by 2030 onthe TEN-T Core Network. At least one charging point per station has to be accessible for coaches.The minimum power level should be at 700-800kW in order to ensure that these trucks will be ableto do long-distance journeys and stop to fully charge during the drivers' mandatory breaks.A cross-industry consortium has been working on the deployment of MCS public charging with the firstpilot project aiming to deploy the first MCS by 2023 [47]. Setting a target for MCS charging in 2025 isadequate as it gives two years for the new standard to be deployed since the first project. However, inthe case of delays in the standards, the 2025 target could be enforced with high power chargers (above350 kW) as a first step and then the minimum power level increased to 700-800 kW from 2027.A study by50Furthermore, when travelling long distances, a long haul battery electric truck will not always comeback to the depot overnight. The revised AFID should thus set targets for the deployment of lowerpower (100 kW) public overnight chargers at truck parking areas along the highways with at least40,000 overnight public chargers in Binding targets - EU overviewBeyond the minimum geographic coverage requirements (which are based on the TEN-T network andurban nodes), the revision of the AFID should also guarantee that the number of public anddestination chargers increases in line with the number of electric trucks on the road. Therefore thenew legislation should set the right framework and targets to reach the level of infrastructuredeployment needed for an ambitious uptake of electric trucks (T&E's Road 2 Zero scenario).The total number of public and destination chargers should amount to around 50,000 charge points inthe EU27+UK, or 42,000 charge points in the EU. Between one third to one half of these charging pointsare estimated to be for public charging.Based on the truck movements analysis detailed previously, the table below presents T&E'srecommendations with respect to the deployment of electric trucks and their charging infrastructurefor the next decade.EUPublic charge points [HPC]3,000 [900]15,000 [4,000]Destination charge pointsPublic + DestinationBattery electric trucks5,0009,000120,00027,00042,000520,000Table 8: T&E's recommendations regarding the number of battery electric trucks on the road andthe required charging infrastructure2019 Given the uncertainties on their charging requirements, non regulated trucks are excluded from theserecommendations, which explains the difference with the results presented before (non regulated trucks areestimated to represent about 15% of the current truck fleet).20 The sum of public and destination might not match the total because of rounding.A study by516.1.4 Binding targets per Member StatesThe revision of the AFID should ensure that the above values for the deployment of charginginfrastructure in the EU27 are met by setting minimum binding per Member State.Setting binding targets for each country would create a clear and harmonized pathway fordeploying charging infrastructure, independent of national agendas which could risk underminingthe longer-term coherence in the deployment strategy. Such targets would also grant certainty andvisibility to the e-mobility value chain, including the truck manufacturers, the grid and chargingoperators, and transport companies.T&E's recommendations for the country binding targets are presented in Annex. Table 9 below gives anoverview of the target for 6 key EU countries: Germany, France,Italy, Spain, Poland and theNetherlands below:GermanyFranceSpainPublic chargers3,5002,200Destination chargers6,2004,000Public + Destination9,7006,3002,0003,7005,700Italy1,4002,6004,000PolandNetherlands1,5002,6004,,400Battery electric trucks120,00080,00072,00051,00051,00018,000Table 9: Targets per Member State (only regulated trucks are presented here)6.1.5 Grid connectionCharging locations (public parking and distribution centers) should be prepared with sufficient gridconnections as early as possible. The preparation of the grid can take several years but will ensure thatthe chargers can be rolled out and integrated to the grid quickly when needed.The EU should ensure that when a truck parking site is built or renovated under the Safe and SecureParking Areas framework [48], the grid connection is sufficient for the future truck charging demand. Itis key that there should be adequate planning of the deployment of the electricity grid and upgradesin line with the expected needs along the highways. In a letter sent in summer 2020, an alliance oftruckmakers, suppliers, NGOs and the power sector urged the Commission to plan ahead for the futuredeployment of electric charging and hydrogen refuelling stations for zero-emission trucks [49].A study by526.2 Revision of the TEN-T RegulationThe Trans-European Transport Network (TEN-T) Regulation addresses the implementation anddevelopment of a Europe-wide network of railway lines, roads, inland waterways, maritime shippingroutes, ports, airports and railroad terminals. The current TEN-T policy is based on TEN-T Regulation(EU) No 1315/2013 which is planned to be revised in 2021 under the European Commission's ActionPlan on the European Green Deal. Both the revision of AFID and the revision of the TEN-T Regulationshould be addressed in a coherent manner as they are both part of the same action point in the EUGreen Deal planning [50].Article 30 of the 2013 TEN-T Regulation called for the 'promotion of efficient low-noise and low-carbonurban freight delivery' at the urban nodes of the TEN-T Core network, but so far very little has beendone to promote electric urban deliveries. T&E asks for the revision of the TEN-T Regulation to makethis one of the key objectives of the new regulation and to strengthen it by championing urban nodesas EU's leaders for zero emission mobility. The sentence in Article 30 should then read 'promotion ofefficient low-noise and zero tailpipe emission urban and regional freight delivery'.To achieve the significant reduction of emissions as demonstrated in this paper, the revised TEN-TRegulation should widen the scope of the urban nodes to a secondary set of freight nodes,effectively doubling the number of urban nodes and roughly doubling the potential of urban nodesto electrify trucks as demonstrated in this paper. These freight nodes should be selected with thespecific aim to cover as much of the EU's urban and regional road freight activity, thus maximising theCO2 emission reduction and air quality benefits in cities.6.3 Finance: Accelerating the uptake of electric trucksAs of today, the two main barriers to adoption of electric trucks are the high upfront costs and the verylimited supply of vehicles. These two factors are intrinsically linked as current low production volumesentails high unit production costs on the one hand and high purchase prices reduces the demand onthe other hand.21In May 2020, the European Commission presented a new €750 billion recovery instrument, NextGeneration EU [52] (on top of the €1.1 billion revamped seven year budget). The spendings on EU'smain fund for transport infrastructure projects, Connecting Europe Facility or CEF, have been21 This is observed through high battery costs for electric heavy duty vehicles (373$/kWh outside of China) whichcompares with the average for electric heavy duty vehicles produced in China and the average for BEV which arerespectively at 140$/kWh and 150$/kWh, according to BNEF [51].A study by53increased to €14.5 billion [53]. If this money is well spent, the market for electric trucks can bekick-started in the next few years and break the self-sustaining cycle of high-costs and low-volumes.226.3.1 EU Recovery Fund & Recharge flagshipAs part of the Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF), the EC strongly encourages Member States to putforward investment and reform plans on the so-called 'Recharge and Refuel' flagship. The seven ECflagships do not set any requirements but 'strongly encourage' Member States to include them in theirrecovery and resilience plans investment and reforms. The EC highlights that these flagships underpincommon challenges, call for coordinated investments and reforms, and will bring tangible benefits tothe economy and citizens across the EU, notably for jobs and growth and for making Europe greener.To meet the climate objectives, it is essential that Member States place a strong focus on the 'Rechargeand Refuel' flagship in their recovery plans, notably on electric truck charging infrastructure. Financingand funding support are necessary to support the initial rollout of the dedicated truck charginginfrastructure: at the depot, at the distribution centre and at public locations, being it urban areas oralong highways. The proactive and anticipated preparation of the electricity grid is also needed toallow for smooth infrastructure deployment throughout the next years.Furthermore, financial support to the trucking sector should be targeted to enable the transition awayfrom diesel and gas as well as for the deployment of charging infrastructure. Firstly, it is essential thatno financial support can be granted to fossil fueled vehicles and infrastructure. Secondly, these plansshould set up financial support programmes to help truckmakers scale up manufacturing ofzero-emission trucks and commit to reach 10% of sales production by 2025. This short term recoveryfund would help support OEMs' transition of manufacturing platforms and help them navigate throughthe economic crisis.6.3.2 CEF Transport Blending Calls & Strategic Rollout Action PlanTo achieve the objectives laid out in this report, T&E recommends to redesign the CEF transportto have adequate andblending calls and to target the announced 'Strategic Rollout Action Plan'streamlined funding mechanisms to accelerate the uptake of electric trucks.23It is of paramount importance that both mechanisms focus on zero emission only (see 5.1.1 ZeroEmission Infrastructure Regulation). Providing financial support to gas trucks would not be compatiblewith the Green Deal objectives, would create lock-in and path dependency effects with adverse22 The previous budget proposal from 2018 was for €11.4 billion.23 The 'Strategic Rollout Action Plan'complement to the revised AFID - to accelerate the roll-out of alternative fuel infrastructure.is planned by the European Commission as a flanking measure -inA study by54consequences on the speed of the uptake of electric trucks and would direct limited financialresources to the creation of stranded assets rather than towards the much needed decarbonisation oftransport.Secondly, both mechanisms should address the three different electric truck charging use cases:24● Transport companies: a fixed amount of money should be made available for the purchase ofelectric trucks and the installation of the associated depot chargers. This amount could befixed per truck size/weight category, or better, it could increase in line with the range of thevehicle (e.g. 100-200€/km of range for heavy trucks, which would fund 20%-40% of theadditional cost). The latter solution is preferable as it incentivises vehicle efficiencyimprovements and longer range vehicles. However, given the official VECTO certification willonly be available in a couple of years (possibly around 2023), the former solution (fixedamount) can be used in the meantime (or battery capacity could be used as a proxy of range).● Shippers owning and operating medium and large distribution centers: streamlined financialsupport should be provided to install the necessary high power opportunity charginginfrastructure at the distribution centers. These destination chargers can be shared by severaltransport companies that load or unload cargo at the distribution center and a booking systemwould maximise utilisation while eliminating charge anxiety for transport operators.● Charge point operators should benefit from a high co-funding rate for the deployment ofpublic charging infrastructure at the urban nodes and along the TEN-T Core network. As themarket maturity for electric trucks is lower than for electric cars, the co-funding rates shouldbe adjusted accordingly and increased from the current 20% co-funding rate applied to publiccharging networks for cars (e.g. Ionity) to 50% co-funding rate, as the new CEF regulation (art14) allows it.24 The marginal cost of adding one km of range to a heavy duty truck is about 500€/km (373$/kWh or 338€/kWhfor e-HDVs outside of China according to BNEF [51] and efficiency around 1.5 kWh/km). This simplifiedcalculation excludes the cost difference of the diesel engine and electric motor.A study by557. T&E's approximated TEN-T core networkAs explained in Section 2.2, in order to analyze truck flows going through main freight routes inEurope, T&E modelled an approximated TEN-T core network. This model is based on the 88 urbannodes defined in the TEN-T regulation and has has been built according to the following methodology:1. Urban nodes pairs have been selected based on distance and on tonnes transported betweenboth locations, thanks to the O/D matrix T&E built on ETIS Plus and Eurostat data. Whichmeans that for each urban node, only the busiest nodes among the nearest ones were kept tobuild these urban node pairs.2. From each pair, the section of the TEN-T network has been approximated as straight linesbetween two nodes.3. Then, the TEN-T network has been completed including all NUTS3 regions within a 50 kmdistance to the straight lines described above. These regions crossed by the network are calledTEN-T regions in this study and are the basis of the analysis.4. Finally, minor manual changes have been made in order to take into consideration localdiscrepancies where straight lines did not make sense and to fit better the actual TEN-Tnetwork (e.g. connections crossing seas).Therefore, the TEN-T network modelled here is a combination of TEN-T regions making up thenetwork. These regions include almost all urban nodes and account for 793 regions out of the 1,348NUTS3 regions in the EU.7.2. T&E's BET truck activity modellingAs explained in Section 3.2, the tonnes.kilometers per electric truck have been modelled based ondifferent parameters: the average payload per truck, the average payload factor and the annualmileage. While the payload and the payload factors are expected to remain constant throughout theageing of a truck, the annual mileage will decrease. This annual decrease has been calculated basedon the EUTRM model and is illustrated below in Figure 23.A study by56Figure 23: Annual mileage modelling for long-haul electric trucksTherefore, the average fleet truck activity will slightly decrease over time as the fleet grows and getsolder. Pushing this modelling up to 2050 with an average lifespan of 15 years, this led to a fleet havinga 600,000 tkm/truck average per year, slightly higher than the current average for long-haul trucks.7.3. Charging infrastructure estimateIn order to estimate the charging infrastructure required for the new battery electric truck fleet, theaverage power needed per truck for each type of charger has been approximated as followed:𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑝𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑟= 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 * 𝑆𝑜𝐶 * 𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦 / 𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒Where:𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑝𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑟is the power output needed in average for each truck to charge in order to drivea certain distance, depending on the charger type.A study by57𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒is the average trip distance driven by the growing battery electric truck fleet, based on thetruck flows modelling (e.g. in 2030, more trips will be electrified in the 600-700 km band than in 2025,see Section 3.2).𝑆𝑜𝐶is the 'state-of-charge' of the battery. This parameter takes into consideration the fact that most ofthe time the battery won't need to be completely filled, as the truck won't arrive at the charginglocation with an empty battery and as it won't charge up to 100% of the battery capacity as between80 and 100% SoC charging the battery is slower.𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦is the truck energy consumption. As explained in Section 3.2, the truck energy consumptionhas been calculated for each period depending on the fleet age (i.e. more and more electric trucks willbe sold and they will have lower energy consumption, which will lower the average fleet energyconsumption).𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒depend on the charger type as chargers are designed for specific use cases.is the average time spent by a truck to charge at a specific charger. This time willAll the parameters being used for each charger are summarized below:YearDepotPublicovernightDestinationHPCCharging time per truckall8h1.5h45 minAverage BET trip distance2025442 km in 2025, 491 km in 2030 and 518 km in 2035SoC202560% in 2025, 70% in 2030 and 80% in 2035Table 10: Assumptions for the average power calculationA study by587.4. Detailed electric truck uptake assumptionsTrip typeTEN-T toTEN-TTEN-T toTEN-TTEN-T toTEN-TTEN-T toTEN-TTEN-T toTEN-TTEN-T toTEN-TTEN-T toTEN-TDistanceband(km)Industry-BaselineEV-LeadersRoad-2-Zero-50010.9%49.3%100%9.1%67.3%100%13.7%70.8%100%%43.1%100%7.1%53.8%100%11.0%70.8%100%%30.8%89.0%5.1%40.4%100%8.2%56.6%100%%12.3%44.5%2.0%20.2%100%4.1%28.3%100%%6.2%29.7%1.0%13.5%100%2.7%21.2%100%%0.0%14.8%0.0%6.7%91.6%1.4%14.2%100%> 10000.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%45.8%0.0%7.1%100%TEN-T to X%36.9%100%8.1%60.6%100%12.4%70.8%100%TEN-T to X%30.8%100%6.1%47.1%100%9.6%63.7%100%TEN-T to X%18.5%74.2%4.1%33.6%100%6.9%49.5%100%TEN-T to X%6.2%29.7%1.0%13.5%100%2.7%21.2%100%TEN-T to X%0.0%0.0%0.0%6.7%91.6%1.4%14.2%100%TEN-T to X%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%45.8%0.0%7.1%100%TEN-T to X> 10000.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%62.0%X to X%24.6%74.2%4.1%33.6%100%6.9%42.5%100%X to X%12.3%44.5%2.0%20.2%100%4.1%28.3%100%X to X%6.2%14.8%0.0%6.7%91.6%1.4%14.2%100%X to X%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%45.8%0.0%7.1%62.0%X to X%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%X to X%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%X to X> 10000.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%A study by597.5. Detailed results per country - Truck activity electrified (Mtkm)CountryIndustry-BaselineEV-LeadersRoad-2-ZeroATBEBGCZDEDKEEESFIFRGRHRHUIEITLTLVNLPLPTROSESISKCYA study by8411260LUUKNOUKEU27EU27+UKEU27+UK+NO+CH. Detailed results per country - Energy needs (GWh)Industry-BaselineEV-LeadersRoad-2-ZeroCountry1639A study byATBEBGCZDEDKEEESFIFRGRHRHUIEIT21994LTLVNLPLPTROSESISKCYLUUKNOUKEU27EU27+UKEU27+UK+NO+CH. Detailed results per country - Long-haul electric trucksCountryATBEBGCZDEIndustry-BaselineEV-LeadersRoad-2-ZeroA study by62DKEEESFIFRGRHRHUIEITLTLVNLPLPTROSESISKCYLUUKNOUKEU27EU27+UKEU27+UK+NO+CHA study by637.8. Detailed results per country - Public HPC chargersIndustry-BaselineEV-LeadersRoad-2-ZeroCountryATBEBGCZDEDKEEESFIFRGRHRHUIEITLTLVNLPLPTROSESISKCY5671130A study byLUUKNOUKEU27EU27+UKEU27+UK+NO+CH. Detailed results per country - Destination chargersIndustry-BaselineEV-LeadersRoad-2-ZeroCountryATBEBGCZDEDKEEESFIFRGRHRHUIEIT71A study byLTLVNLPLPTROSESISKCYLUUKNOUKEU27EU27+UKEU27+UK+NO+CH. Detailed results per country - Depot chargersCountryATBEBGCZDEIndustry-BaselineEV-LeadersRoad-2-ZeroA study byDKEEESFIFRGRHRHUIEITLTLVNLPLPTROSESISKCYLUUKNOUKEU27EU27+UKEU27+UK+NO+CH2162453A study by677.11. Detailed results per country - Overnight chargersIndustry-BaselineEV-LeadersRoad-2-ZeroCountryATBEBGCZDEDKEEESFIFRGRHRHUIEITLTLVNLPLPTROSESISKA study by68CYLUUKNOUK0EUEU27+UKEU27+UK+NO+CH01A study by69References1.ACEA. (2021). Vehicles in use in Europe. Retrieved from GHG data from the UNFCCC. (2019). Retrieved from, December 15). All new trucks sold must be fossil free by 2040. Retrieved from & Environment. (2020). Roadmap for electric truck charging. Retrieved from & Environment. Unlocking electric trucking in the EU: recharging in cities.Retrieved from Commission. (2013). EU regulation (1315/2013). Retrieved from Parliament. (2014). Directive 2014/94/EU. Retrieved from & Mobility, L. (2009). ETIS Plus project. Retrieved from & Environment. Unlocking electric trucking in the EU: methodology. Retrievedfrom Scania. (2021, January 19). Scania's commitment to battery-electric vehicles. Retrieved from MAN. (2021, January 26). Press release. Retrieved from Trucks, R. (2021, March 23). Renault to offer an electric range for each market segment from 2023.Retrieved from study by7013. Nikola Tre to build electric trucks at Iveco in Germany. (2020, July 2). Electrive. Retrieved from A closer look at Tesla's latest semi electric truck prototype. (2021, May 2). Electrek. Retrieved from Eurostat. (2018). Eurostat road data. Retrieved from NUTS classification. Retrieved from Consult, R. (2016). TEN-T core network map. Retrieved from Conference of European Directors of Roads. TEN-T 2019 performance report. Retrievedfrom (2020, October 3). Renault trucks starts serial production of its electric trucks.20. Powering the transition towards green energy in Europe. Retrieved from TRACCS database. (2012). Retrieved from ACEA. ACEA position paper: review of the alternative fuel infrastructure directive. Retrievedfrom Transport & Environment. How to decarbonize European transport by 2050? Retrieved from European Commission. Sustainable and Smart Mobility Strategy. Retrieved from Riccardo-AEA. (2015). Light weighting as a means of improving Heavy Duty Vehicles' energyefficiency and overall CO2 emissions. Retrieved fromec. European Parliament. Regulation (EU) 2019/1242. Retrieved from (n.d.). EU transportation roadmap model. Retrieved from How to decarbonise long-haul trucking in Germany. Retrievedfrom study by7129. Earl, T. Analysis of long haul battery electric trucks in EU. Retrieved from Eurostat database. Retrieved from Business insider. (2019, September 6). Trucking detention time. Retrieved from Regulation (EU) 561/2006. Retrieved from CO2 emissions from heavy-duty vehicles. Retrieved from). Fuel Efficiency Technology in European Heavy-Duty Vehicles: Baseline and Potential forthe 2020–2030 Time Frame. Retrieved from Florian Knobloch, Steef V. Hanssen, Aileen Lam, Hector Pollitt, Pablo Salas, Unnada Chewpreecha,Mark A. J. Huijbregts and Jean-Francois Mercure. Net emission reductions from electriccars and heat pumps in 59 world regions over time. Nature. Retrieved from How clean are electric cars? Retrieved from Trucks, V. (2020, May 11). Volvo Trucks launches a complete range of electric trucks starting inEurope in 2021. Retrieved from Trucks, D. (2020, September 16). Daimler Trucks presents technology strategy for electrification –world premiere of Mercedes-Benz fuel-cell concept truck. Retrieved from Buses, M. T. A. (2020, October 19). MAN presents Zero-Emission Roadmap. Retrieved from Hydrogen Council & McKinsey. A perspective on hydrogen investment, market developmentand cost competitiveness. Retrieved fromA study by72 Roadmap to decarbonising European shipping. Retrieved from Electrofuels? Yes, we can … if we're efficient. Retrieved from Prognos, Öko-Institut, Wuppertal-Institut. Studie im Aurag von Agora Energiewende,Agora Verkehrswende und Stiung Klimaneutralität. Retrieved from Natural gas-powered vehicles and ships. Retrieved from Euractive. (2019, February 19). E-trucks: European automakers' third and final chance to getelectrification right. Retrieved from ANNEX to the Commission Implementing Decision amending themultiannual work programme on the financing of the Connecting Europe Facility -Transport sector. Retrieved from Verband der Automobilindustrie. (2021, March 9). Branchenübergreifendes Konsortium reichtFörderantrag zum Megawattladen für Nutzfahrzeuge ein. Retrieved from Safe and secure truck parking framework. Retrieved from Alliance of truckmakers, suppliers, NGOs and the power sectorurge the Commission to require charging stations at truck parking. Retrieved from Annex of the European Green Deal Communication: 'Review of theAlternative Fuels Infrastructure Directive and the Trans European Network – Transport Regulation.Retrieved fromec. BNEF. Electric vehicle outlook 2020. Retrieved from Europe's moment: Repair and Prepare for the Next Generation.Retrieved fromA study by73 The EU budget powering the recovery plan for Europe. Retrievedfrom study by74
